# koans_dataset
A kōan is a story, dialogue, or statement, which is used in Zen practive to provoke the "great doubt" and test a student's progress in Zen practice. 
Kōans collectively form a substantial body of literature studied by Zen practitioners and scholars worldwide. Kōan collections commonly referenced in English include The Blue Cliff Record, The Book of Equanimity, The Gateless Gate, The True Dharma Eye and The Iron Flute.

This dataset attempts to preprocess those collections. 
Blue Riff, Book of Equanimity and The Gateless Gate are preprocessed. Next one The True Dharma Eye.
There are around 250 examples (koans) in this dataset, for now.

Formate: txt (title of each koan preceds a --!-- and every koan ends with a ----)


<h3>Blue Cliff Record</h3>
<li><strong> the highest meaning of the holy truths </strong> emperor wu of liang asked the great master bodhidharma, 'what is the highest meaning of the holy truths?'bodhidharma said, 'empty, without holiness.' the emperor said, 'who is facing me?' bodhidharma replied, 'i don't know.' the emperor did not understand. after this bodhidharma crossed the yangtse river and came to the kingdom of wei. later the emperor brought this up to master chih and asked him about it. master chih asked, 'does your majesty know who this man is?' the emperor said, 'i don't know.' master chih said, 'he is the mahasattva avalokitesvara, transmitting the buddha mind seal. ' the emperor felt regretful, so he wanted to send an emissary to go invite (bodhidharma to return). master chih told him, 'your majesty, don't say that you will send someone to fetch him back. even if everyone in the whole country were to go after him, he still wouldn't return.' </li><li><strong> the ultimate path is without difficulty </strong> chao chou, teaching the assembly, said,  'the ultimate path is without difficulty; just avoid picking and choosing. as soon as there are words spoken, ,this is picking and choosing,' ,this is clarity.' this old monk does not abide within clarity; do you still preserve anything or not?' at that time a certain monk asked, ,since you do not abide within clarity, what do you preserve?' chao chou replied, ' don't know either.' the monk said, 'since you don't know, teacher, why do you nevertheless say that you do not abide within clarity?' chao chou said, 'it is enough to ask about the matter; bow and withdraw.' </li><li><strong> master ma is unwell </strong> great master ma was unwell. the temple superintendent asked him, 'teacher, how has your venerable health been in recent days?' the great master said, 'sun face buddha, moon face buddha.' </li><li><strong> te shan carrying his bundle </strong> when te shan arrived at kuei shan, he carried his bundle with him into the teaching hall, where he crossed from east to west and from west to east.  he looked around and said, 'there's nothing, no one.' then he went out. hsueh tou added the comment, 'completely exposed.' but when te shan got to the monastery gate, he said, 'still, i shouldn't be so coarse.' so he reentered (the hall) with full ceremony to meet (kuei shan).  as kuei shan sat there, te shan held up his sitting mat and said, 'teacher!' kuei shan reached for his whisk, whereupon te shan shouted, shook out his sleeves, and left. hsueh tou added the comment, 'completely exposed.' te shan turned his back on the teaching hall, put on his straw sandals, and departed. that evening kuei shan asked the head monk, 'where is that newcomer who just came?' the head monk answered, 'at that time he turned his back on the teaching hall, put on his straw sandals, and departed.' kuei shan said, 'hereafter that lad will go to the summit of a solitary peak, build himself a grass hut, and go on scolding the buddhas and reviling the patriarchs.' hsueh tou added the comment, 'he adds frost to snow.' </li><li><strong> hsueh feng's grain of rice </strong> hsueh feng, teaching his community, said, 'pick up the whole great earth in your fingers, and it's as big as a grain of rice. throw it down before you: if, like a lacquer bucket, you don't understand, i'll beat the drum to call everyone to look.' </li><li><strong> yun men's every day is a good day </strong> yun men said, 'i don't ask you about before the fifteenth day;  try to say something about after the fifteenth day.' yun men himself answered for everyone, 'every day is a good day.' </li><li><strong> hui ch'ao asks about buddha </strong> a monk (named hui ch'ao) asked fa yen,t 'hui ch'ao asks the teacher, what is buddha?' fa yen said, 'you are hui ch'ao.' </li><li><strong> ts'ui yen's eyebrows </strong> at the end of the summer retreat ts'ui yen said to the community, 'all summer long i've been talking to you, brothers; look and see if my eyebrows are still there.'m pao fu said, 'the thief's heart is cowardly.' ch'ang ch'ing said, 'grown.' yun men said, 'a barrier.'  </li><li><strong> chao chou's four gates </strong> a monk asked chao chou, 'what is chao chou?' chao chou replied, 'east gate, west gate, south gate, north gate.' </li><li><strong> mu chou's thieving phoney </strong> mu chou asked a monk, 'where have you just come from?' the monk immediately shouted. mu chou said, 'i've been shouted at by you once.' again the monk shouted. mu chou said, 'after three or four shouts, then what?' the monk had nothing to say.  mu chou then hit him and said,  'what a thieving phoney you are! ' </li><li><strong> huang po's gobblers of dregs  </strong> huang po, instructing the community, said, 'all of you people are gobblers of dregs; if you go on travelling around this way, where will you have today? do you know that there are no teachers of ch'an in all of china?' at that time a monk came forward and said, 'then what about those in various places who order followers and lead communities? ' huang po said, 'i do not say that there is no ch'an; it's just that there are no teachers. '  </li><li><strong> tung shan's three pounds of hemp  </strong> a monk asked tung shan, 'what is buddha?' tung shan said, 'three pounds of hemp.' </li><li><strong> pa ling's snow in a silver bowl </strong> a monk asked pa ling, 'what is the school of kanadeva?' pa ling said, 'piling up snow in a silver bowl.'  </li><li><strong> yun men's appropriate statement </strong> a monk asked yun men, 'what are the teachings of a whole lifetime? ' yun men said, 'an appropriate statement.' </li><li><strong> yun men's upside-down statement </strong> a monk asked yun men, 'when it's not the present intellect and it's not the present phenomena, what is it?'·a yun men said, 'an upside-down statement.' </li><li><strong> ching ch'ing's man in the weeds </strong> a monk asked ching ch'ing, 'i am breaking out; i ask the teacher to break in.' ching ch'ing said, 'can you live or not?' the monk said, 'if i weren't alive, i'd be laughed at by people.' ching ch'ing said, 'you too are a man in the weeds.' </li><li><strong> hsiang lin's meaning of the coming from the west </strong> a monk asked hsiang lin, 'what is the meaning of the patriarch's coming from the west?' hsiang lin said, 'sitting for a long time becomes toilsome.'</li><li><strong> national teacher chung's seamless monument </strong> emperor su tsung asked national teacher hui chung, 'after you die, what will you need?' the national teacher said, 'build a seamless monument for me.' the emperor said, 'please tell me, master, what the monument would look like.' the national teacher was silent for a long time; then he asked, 'do you understand?' the emperor said, 'i don't understand.' the national teacher said, 'i have a disciple to whom i have transmitted the teaching, tan yuan, who is well versed in this matter. please summon him and ask him about it.'' after the national teacher passed on, the emperor summoned tan yuan and asked him what the meaning of this was. tan yuan said, south of hsiang, north of t'an;   hsueh tou added the comment, 'a single hand does not make random sound.' in between there's gold sufficient to a nation. hsueh tou added the comment, 'a rough-hewn staf£.' beneath the shadowless tree, the community ferryboat;  hsueh tou added the comment, 'the sea is calm, the rivers are clear.' within the crystal palace, there's no one who knows. hsueh tou added the comment, 'he has raised it up.' </li><li><strong> chu ti's one-finger ch'a </strong> whenever anything was asked,  master chu ti would just raise one finger. </li><li><strong> lung ya's meaning of the coming from the west </strong> lung ya asked ts'ui wei, 'what is the meaning of the patriarch's coming from the west?' wei said, 'pass me the meditation brace.' ya gave the meditation brace to wei; wei took it and hit him. ya said, 'since you hit me i let you hit me. in essence, though, there is no meaning of the patriarch's coming from the west.' ya also asked lin chi, 'what is the meaning of the patriarch's coming from the west?' chi said, 'pass me the cushion.' ya took the cushion and handed it to lin chi; chi took it and hit him.  ya said, 'since you hit me i let you hit me. in essence, though, there is no meaning of the patriarch's coming from the west.' </li><li><strong> chih men's lotus flower, lotus leaves </strong> a monk asked chih men, 'how is it when the lotus flower has not yet emerged from the water?' chih men said, 'a lotus flower.' the monk said, 'what about after it has emerged from the water?' men said, 'lotus leaves.' </li><li><strong> hsueh feng's turtle-nosed snake </strong> hsueh feng taught the assembly saying, 'on south mountain there's a turtle-nosed snake. all of you people must take a good look.' ch'ang ch'ing said, 'in the hall today there certainly are people who are losing their bodies and their lives.' a monk related this to hsuan sha.  hsuan sha said, 'it takes elder brother leng (ch'ang ch'ing) to be like this. nevertheless, i am not this way.' the monk asked, 'what about you, teacher?' hsuan sha said, 'why make use of 'south mountain'?' yun men took his staff and threw it down in front of hsueh feng, making a gesture of fright. </li><li><strong> pao fu's summit of the mystic peak </strong> once when pao fu and ch'ang ch'ing were wandering in the mountains, pao fu pointed with his hand and said, 'right here is the summit of the mystic peak.' ch'ang ch'ing said, 'indeed it is. what a pity!' hsueh tou added a word, saying, 'today what is the purpose of travelling the mountains together with these fellows?' he also said, 'hundreds of thousands of years hence, i don't say there are none, just that they will be few.' later this (dialogue between pao fu and ch'ang ch'ing) was quoted to ching ch'ing.  ching ch'ing said, 'if it hadn't been mr. sun (pao fu), then you would have seen skulls covering the fields.' </li><li><strong> kuei shan and iron grindstone liu </strong> iron grindstone liu arrived at kuei shan. kuei shan said, 'old cow, so you've come!' the grindstone said, 'tomorrow there's a great communal feast on t'ai shan; are you going to go, teacher?' kuei shan relaxed his body and lay down; the grindstone immediately left.  </li><li><strong> the hermit of lotus flower peak holds up his staff </strong> the hermit of lotus flower peak held up his staff and showed it to the assembly saying, 'when the ancients got here, why didn't they consent to stay here?' there was no answer from the assembly, so he himself answered for them, 'because they did not gain strength on the road.' again he said, 'in the end, how is it?' and again he himself answered in their place, 'with my staff across my shoulder, i pay no heed to people-! go straight into the myriad peaks.' </li><li><strong> pai chang's sitting alone on ta hsiung mountain  </strong> a monk asked pai chang, 'what's the extraordinary affair?' chang said, 'sitting alone on ta hsiung mountain.' the monk bowed; chang thereupon hit him. </li><li><strong> yun men's the body exposed, the golden wind </strong> a monk asked yun men, 'how is it when the tree withers and the leaves fall?' yun men said, 'body exposed in the golden wind.'  </li><li><strong> nan ch'uan's truth that's never been spoken </strong> nan ch'uan went to see master nirvana of pai chang (mountain.) chang asked, 'have all the sages since antiquity had a truth that they haven't spoken for people?' ch'uan said, 'they have.' chang said, 'what is the truth that hasn't been spoken for people?' ch'uan said, 'it's not mind, it's not buddha, it's not any thing.' chang said, 'you said it.' ch'uan said, 'i am just thus. what about you, teacher?' chang said, 'i am not a great man of knowledge either: how would i know whether it has been spoken or not?' ch'uan said, 'i don't understand.' chang said, 'i've already spoken too much for you.' </li><li><strong> ta sui's it goes along with it </strong> a monk asked ta sui, 'the conflagration at the end of the eon sweeps through and the universe is totally destroyed. i wonder, is this one destroyed or not?' sui said, 'it is destroyed.' the monk said, 'if so, then this goes along with it.' sui said, 'it goes along with it.' </li><li><strong> chao chou's big turnips </strong> a monk asked chao chou, 'teacher, i have heard that you have personally seen nan ch'uan. is this true or not?' chou said, 'chen chou produces big turnips.' </li><li><strong> ma ku carrying his ring-staff </strong> ma ku, carrying his ring-staff, a went to chang ching. he circled the meditation seat three times, then shook his staff once and stood there upright. chang ching said, 'correct. correct.' (hsueh tou added a word, saying 'wrong!') ma ku also went to nan ch'uan: he circled the meditation seat three times, shook his staff once and stood there upright.  nan ch'uan said, 'incorrect. incorrect.' (hsueh tou added a word, saying, 'wrong!') ma ku then said, 'chang ching said 'correct'; why do you say 'incorrect,' master? ' nan ch'uan said, 'chang ching is correct; it's you who are incorrect.  this is what is turned about by the power of the wind; in the end it breaks down and disintegrates.' </li><li><strong> elder ting stands motionless </strong> elder ting asked lin chi, 'what is the great meaning of the buddhist teaching?' chi came down off his meditation seat, grabbed and held (ting), gave him a slap, and then pushed him away. ting stood there motionless. a monk standing by said, 'elder ting, why do you not bow?' just as ting bowed,s he suddenly was greatly enlightened.  </li><li><strong> ministry president ch'en sees tzufu </strong> ch'en ts'ao, ministry president, went to see tzu fu. when fu saw him coming, he immediately drew a circle. ts'ao said, 'my coming here like this has already missed the pointi how much more so, to go on and draw a circle!' fu thereupon closed the door of his room.  hsueh tau said, 'ch'en ts'ao has just one eye.'  </li><li><strong> yang shan asks 'where have you come from?'' </strong> yang shan asked a monk, 'where have you just come from?' the monk said, 'mount lu.' yang shan said, 'did you visit five elders peak?' the monk said, 'i didn't get there.' yang shan said, 'you never visited the mountain at all.' (later,) yun men said, 'these words were all for the sake of compassion; thus they had a conversation in the weeds.' </li><li><strong> the dialogue of manjusri and wucho </strong> manjusri asked wu cho, 'where have you just come from?' wu cho said, 'the south.' manjusri said, 'how is the buddhist teaching being carried on in the south?' wu cho said, 'monks of the last age have little regard for the rules of discipline.' manjusri said, 'how numerous are the congregations?' wu cho said, 'some three hundred, some five hundred.' wu cho asked manjusri, 'how is it being carried on hereabouts?' manjusri said, 'ordinary people and sages dwell together; dragons and snakes intermingle.' wu cho said, 'how numerous are the congregations?' manjusri said, 'in front, three by three; in back, three by three.' </li><li><strong> ch'ang sha wandering in the mountains </strong> one day ch'ang sha went wandering in the mountains. upon returning, when he got to the gate,t the head monk asked, 'where are you coming from, master?' sha said, 'from wandering in the mountains.' the head monk asked, 'where did you go? ' sha said, 'first i went pursuing the fragrant grasses; then i returned following the falling flowers.' the head monk said, 'how very much like the sense of springtime.' sha said, 'it even surpasses the autumn dew' dripping on the lotuses.' hsueh tou added the remark, 'thanks for your reply.'  </li><li><strong> p'an shan's there is nothing in the world </strong> p'an shan imparted the words which said, there is nothing in the triple world; where can mind be found?' </li><li><strong> feng hsueh's workings of the iron </strong> at the government headquarters in ying chou, feng hsueh entered the hall and said,t 'the patriarchal masters' mind seal is formed like the workings of the iron ox:a when taken away, the impression remains; when left there, then the impression is ruined. but if neither removed nor left there,s is sealing right or is not sealing right? ' at that time there was a certain elder lu p'i who came forth and said, 'i have the workings of the iron ox: please, teacher, do not impress the seal.' hsueh said, 'accustomed to scouring the oceans fishing for whales, i regret to find instead a frog crawling in the muddy sand.' p'i stood there thinking. hsueh shouted and said, 'elder, why do you not speak further? ' p'i hesitated;  hsueh hit him with his whisk.d hsueh said, 'do you still remember the words? try to quote them.' as p'i was about to open his mouth,t hsueh hit him again with his whisk. the governor said, 'the buddhist law and the law of kings are the same.' hsueh said, 'what principle have you seen?' the governor said, 'when you do not settle what is to be settled, instead you bring about disorder.'b hseuh thereupon descended from his seat. </li><li><strong> yun men's flowering hedge </strong> a monk asked yun men, 'what is the pure body of reality? ' yun men said, 'a flowering hedge.' the monk asked, 'what is it like when one goes on in just such a way? ' yun men said, 'a golden-haired lion.'a </li><li><strong> nan ch'uan's it's like a dream </strong> as the officer lu hsuan was talking with nan ch'uan, he said, 'master of the teachings chao said, 'heaven, earth, and i have the same root; myriad things and i are one body.' this is quite marvelous .'' nan ch'uan pointed to a flower in the garden. he called to the officer and said, 'people these days see this flower as a dream.' </li><li><strong>  chao chou's man who has died the great deat </strong> chao chou asked t'ou tzu, 'how is it when a man who has died the great death returns to life? ' t'ou tzu said, 'he must not go by night: he must get there in daylight.' </li><li><strong> layman p'ang's good snowflake </strong> when layman p'ang took leave of yao shan, shan ordered ten ch'an travellers to escort him to the gate. the layman pointed to the snow in the air and said, 'good snowflakesthey don't fall in any other place.' at the time one of the ch'an travellers named ch'uan said, 'where do they fall?' the layman slapped him once. ch'uan said, 'even a layman shouldn't be so coarse.' the layman said, 'though you call yourself a ch'an traveller this way, the king of death still won't let you go.' ch'uan said, 'how about you, layman?' again the layman slapped him and said, 'your eyes see like a blind man, your mouth speaks like a mute.'  hsueh tau said besides, 'when p'ang first spoke i just would have made a snowball and hit him with it.' </li><li><strong> tung shan's no cold or heat </strong> a monk asked tung shan, 'when cold and heat come, how can we avoid them?' shan said, 'why don't you go to the place where there is no cold or heat?' the monk said, 'what is the place where there is no cold or heat? ' tung shan said, 'when it's cold, the cold kills you when it's hot, the heat kills you.' </li><li><strong> ho shan's knowing how to beat the drum </strong> ho shan imparted some words saying, 'cultivating study is called 'learning.' cutting off study is called 'neamess.' going beyond these two is to be considered real going beyond. ' a monk came forward and asked, 'what is 'real going beyond'?' shan said, 'knowing how to beat the drum.' again he asked, 'what is the real truth?' shan said, 'knowing how to beat the drum.' again he asked, ''mind is buddha'-l'm not asking about this. what is not mind and not buddha?' shan said, 'knowing how to beat the drum.'b again he asked, 'when a transcendent man comes, how do you receive him?' shan said, 'knowing how to beat the drum.' </li><li><strong> chao chou's seven-pound cloth shirt  </strong> a monk asked chao chou, 'the myriad things return to one. where does the one return to?' chou said, 'when i was in ch'ing chou i made a cloth shirt. it weighed seven pounds.'  </li><li><strong> ching ch'ing's sound of raindrops </strong> ching ch'ing asked a monk, 'what sound is that outside the gate?' the monk said, 'the sound of raindrops.' ch'ing said, 'sentient beings are inverted. they lose themselves and follow after things.' the monk said, 'what about you, teacher? ' ch'ing said, 'i almost don't lose mysel£.' the monk said, 'what is the meaning of 'i almost don't lose myself'? ' ch'ing said, 'though it still should be easy to express oneself, to say the whole thing has to be difficult.'  </li><li><strong> ynn men's six do not take it in  </strong> a monk asked yun men, 'what is the body of reality?'a men said, 'six do not take it in.' </li><li><strong> turning over the tea kettle at chao ch'ing  </strong> when minister wang entered chao ch'ing, they were making tea. at the time elder lang was holding the kettle for ming chao. lang turned the tea kettle over. seeing this, the minister asked the elder, 'what's under the tea stove?' lang said, the spirit who holds up stoves.' the minister said, 'if it's the spirit who holds up stoves, why then did you tum over the tea kettle?' lang said, 'serve as an official for a thousand days, lose it in a single moming.' the minister shook out his sleeves and left.  ming chao said, elder lang, you've eaten chao ch'ing food, but still you go beyond the river to make noise gathering charred wood.' lang said, 'what about you, teacher?' ming chao said, the spirit got the advantage.' hsueh tau said, 'at the time i just would have kicked over the tea stove.' </li><li><strong> san sheng's golden fish who has passed through the net </strong> san sheng asked hsueh feng, 'i wonder, what does the golden fish who has passed through the net use for food?' feng said, 'when you come out of the net i'll tell you.' sheng said, 'the teacher of fifteen-hundred people and you don't even know what to say!' feng said, 'my affairs as abbot are many and complicated.'  </li><li><strong> yun men's every atom samadhi </strong>  a monk asked yun men, 'what is every atom samadhi?' men said, 'food in the bowl, water in the bucket.'  </li><li><strong> hsueh feng's what is it? </strong> when hsueh feng was living in a hut, there were two monks who came to pay their respects. seeing them coming, he pushed open the door of the hut with his hand, popped out, and said, 'what is it?' a monk also said, 'what is it?' feng lowered his head and went back inside the hut. later the monk came to yen t'ou. t'ou asked, 'where are you coming from?' the monk said, 'i've come from ling nan.' t'ou said, 'did you ever go to hsueh feng?' the monk said, 'i went there.' t'ou said, 'what did he have to say?' the monk recounted the preceding story. t'ou said, 'what did he say?' the monk said, 'he said nothing; he lowered his head and went back inside the hut.' t'ou said, 'alas! it's too bad i didn't tell him the last word before;  if i had told him, no one on earth could cope with old hsueh.' at the end of the summer the monk again brought up the preceding story to ask for instruction. t'ou said, 'why didn't you ask earlier?' the monk said, 'i didn't dare to be casual.' t'ou said, 'though hsueh feng is born of the same lineage as me, he doesn't die in the same lineage as me. if you want to know the last word, just this is it.' </li><li><strong> chao chou lets asses cross, lets horses cross </strong> a monk asked chao chou, 'for a long time i've heard of the stone bridge of chao chou, but now that i've come here i just see a simple log bridge.' chou said, 'you just see the log bridge; you don't see the stone bridge.' the monk said, 'what is the stone bridge?' chou said, 'it lets asses cross, it lets horses cross.' </li><li><strong> pai chang's wild ducks </strong> once when great master ma and pai chang were walking together they saw some wild ducks fly by. the great master asked, 'what is that?' chang said, 'wild ducks.' the great master said, 'where have they gone? ' chang said, 'they've flown away.' the great master then twisted pai chang's nose. chang cried out in pain.  the great master said, 'when have they ever flown away?' </li><li><strong> yun men extends both hands </strong> yun men asked a monk, 'where did you come here from?' the monk said, 'hsi ch'an.' yun men said, 'what words and phrases are there at hsi ch'an these days?' the monk extended both handsi yun men slapped him once. the monk said, 'i'm still talking.' yun men then extended his two hands.? the monk was speechless, so yun men hit him. </li><li><strong> tao wu's condolence call </strong> tao wu and chien yuan went to a house to make a condolence call. yuan hit the coffin and said, 'alive or dead?' wu said, 'i won't say alive, and i won't say dead.' yuan said, 'why won't you say?' wu said, 'i won't say.' halfway back, as they were returning, yuan said, 'tell me right away, teacher; if you don't tell me, i'll hit you.' wu said, 'you may hit me, but i won't say,' yuan then hit him. later tao wu passed on. yuan went to shih shuang and brought up the foregoing story. shuang said, 'i won't say alive, and i won't say dead.' yuan said, 'why won't you say?' shuang said, 'i won't say, i won't say.' at these words yuan had an insight.' one day yuan took a hoe into the teaching hall and crossed back and forth, from east to west and west to east. shuang said, 'what are you doing? ' yuan said, 'i'm looking for relics of our late master.' shuang said, 'vast waves spread far and wide, foaming billows flood the skies-what relics of our late master are you looking for?' hsueh tau added a comment saying, 'heavens! heavens!' yuan said, 'this is just where i should apply effort.' fu of t'ai yuan said, 'the late master's relics are still present.' </li><li><strong> ch'in shan's one arrowpoint smashes three barriers </strong> ch'an traveller liang asked ch'in shan, 'how is it when a single arrowhead smashes three barriers?'  shan said, 'bring out the lord within the barriers for me to see.' liang said, 'so then knowing my fault i must change.' shan said, 'why wait any longer?' liang said, 'a well-shot arrow doesn't hit anywhere,' and (started to) leave. shan said, 'come here a minute.' liang turned his head;  shan held him tight and said, 'leaving aside for the moment a single arrowhead smashing three barriers, let's see you shoot an arrow.' liang hesitated/ so shan hit him seven times and said, 'i'll allow as this fellow will be doubting for thirty more years.' </li><li><strong> chao chou's stupid oaf </strong> a monk asked chao chou, ' 'the ultimate path has no difficulties-just avoid picking and choosing.' what is not picking and choosing?' chou said, ' 'in the heavens and on earth i alone am the honored one.' ' the monk said, 'this is still picking and choosing.' chou said, 'stupid oaf! where is the picking and choosing? ' the monk was speechless.  </li><li><strong> chao chou can't explain </strong> a monk asked chao chou, ' 'the ultimate path has no difficulties-just avoid picking and choosing'-isn't this a cliche for people of these times?' chou said, 'once someone asked me, and i really couldn't explain for five years.' </li><li><strong> chao chou's why not quote it fully? </strong> a monk asked chao chou, ' 'the ultimate path has no difficulties-just avoid picking and choosing. as soon as there are words and speech, this is picking and choosing.' so how do you help people, teacher? ' chou said, 'why don't you quote this saying in full?' the monk said, 'i only remember up to here.' chou said, 'it's just this: 'this ultimate path has no difficulties-just avoid picking and choosing.' ' </li><li><strong> yun men's staff changes into a dragon </strong> yun men showed his staff to the assembly and said,  'the staff has changed into a dragon and swallowed the universe. mountains, rivers, the great earth-where are they to be found?' </li><li><strong> feng hsueh's one atom of dust </strong> feng hsueh, giving a talk, said,l'if you set up a single atom of dust, the nation flourishes; if you do not set up a single atom of dust, the nation perishes.' hsueh tou raised his staff and said, 'are there any patchrobed monks who will live together and die together?' </li><li><strong> yun men's within there is a jewel </strong> yun men said to the community, 'within heaven and earth, through space and time,  there is a jewel,  hidden inside the mountain of form. pick up a lamp and go into the buddhahall; take the triple gate and bring it on the lamp.' </li><li><strong> nan ch'uan kills a cat </strong> at nan ch'uan's place one day the (monks of) the eastern and western halls were arguing about a cat. when nan ch'uan saw this, he then held up the cat and said, 'if you can speak, then i will not kill it.' no one in the community replied; nan ch'uan cut the cat into two pieces.  </li><li><strong> nan ch'uan questions chao chou </strong> nan ch'uan recited the preceding story to question chao chou. chou immediately took off his straw sandals, placed them on his head, and left. nan ch'uan said, 'if you had been here, you could have saved the cat.' </li><li><strong> an outsider questions the buddha </strong> an outsider asked the buddha, 'i do not ask about the spoken or the unspoken.' the world honored one remained silent. the outsider sighed in admiration and said, 'the world honored one's great kindness and great compassion have opened up my clouds of illusion and let me gain entry.' after the outsider had left, ananda asked the buddha, 'what did the outsider realize, that he said he had gained entry?' the buddha said, 'like a good horse, he goes as soon as he sees the shadow of the whip.' </li><li><strong> yen t'ou's getting huang ch'ao's sword </strong> yen t'ou asked a monk, 'where do you come from?' the monk said, 'from the western capital.' yen t'ou said, 'after huang ch'ao had gone, did you get his sword?' the monk said, 'i got it.' yen t'ou extended his neck, came near and said, 'yaa!' the monk said, 'your head has fallen, master.' yen t'ou laughed out loud.  later that monk went to hsueh feng.  feng asked, 'where did you come from?' the monk said, 'from yen t'ou.' hsueh feng said, 'what did he have to say?' the monk recounted the preceding story. hsueh feng hit him thirty blows with his staff and drove him out. </li><li><strong> mahasattva fu expounds the scripture </strong> emperor wu of liang requested mahasattva fu to expound the diamond cutter scripture. the mahasattva shook the desk once, then got down off the seat.  emperor wu was astonished. master chih asked him, 'does your majesty understand?' the emperor said, 'i do not understand.' master chih said, 'the mahasattva fu has expounded the scripture.' </li><li><strong> yang shan's what's your name? </strong> yang shan asked san sheng, 'what is your name?' sheng said, 'hui chi.' yang shan said, 'hui chi? that's me.' sheng said, 'my name is hui jan.' yang shan laughed aloud.  </li><li><strong> nan ch'uan's circle </strong> nan ch'uan, kuei tsung, and ma ku went together to pay respects to national teacher chung. when they got halfway there, nan ch'uan drew a circle on the ground and said, 'if you can speak, then let's go on.' kuei tsung sat down inside the circle; ma ku curtseyed. nan ch'uan said, 'then let's not go on.' kuei tsung said, 'what's going on in your mind?'  </li><li><strong> kuei shan attends on pai chang </strong> kuei shan, wu feng, and yun yen were together attending on pai chang. pai chang asked kuei shan, 'with your throat, mouth, and lips shut, how will you speak?' kuei shan said, 'please, teacher, you speak instead.' chang said, 'i don't refuse to speak to you, but i fear that (if i did) in the future i would be bereft of descendants.' </li><li><strong> wu feng's shut up, teacher </strong> pai chang also asked wu feng, 'with your throat, mouth, and lips shut, how will you speak?' feng said, 'teacher, you too should shut up.' chang said, 'where there's no one, i shade my eyes with my hand and gaze out towards you.' </li><li><strong> pai chang questions yun yen </strong> pai chang also asked yun yen, 'with your throat, mouth, and lips shut, how will you speak?' yen said, 'teacher, do you have (any way to speak) or not?' chang said, 'i have lost my descendants.' </li><li><strong> ma tsu's permutations of assertion and denial </strong> a monk asked grand master ma, 'please, teacher, going beyond the permutations of assertion and denial, directly point out to me the meaning of the coming from the west.' master ma said, 'i'm tired today and can't explain for you. go ask chih tsang.' when the monk asked chih tsang,j tsang said, 'why didn't you ask the teacher? ' the monk said, 'the teacher had me come here to ask you.' tsang said, 'i have a headache today and can't explain for you. go ask elder brother hai.' when the monk asked elder brother hai (pai chang), hai said, 'at this point, after all, i don't understand.' when the monk related this to grand master ma, master ma said, 'tsang's head is white, hai's head is black.' </li><li><strong> chin niu's rice pail </strong> every day at mealtime, master chin niu would personally take the rice pail and do a dance in front of the monks' hall: laughing aloud, he would say, 'bodhisattvas, come eat! ' hsueh tou said, 'though he acted like this, chin niu was not good-hearted.' a monk asked ch'ang ch'ing, 'when the man of old said, 'bodhisattvas, come eat!' what was his meaning? ' ch'ing said, 'much like joyful praise on the occasion of a meal.' </li><li><strong> wu chiu's unjust beating </strong> a monk came to wu chiu from the congregation of the master of ting chou. wu chiu asked, 'how does ting chou's dharma path compare to here? ' the monk said, 'it's not different.' chiu said, 'if it's not different, then you should go back there,' and then hit him. the monk said, 'there are eyes on the staff: you shouldn't carelessly hit people.' chiu said, 'today i've hit one,' and hit him again three times. the monk thereupon went out. chiu said, 'all along there's been someone receiving an unjust beating.' the monk turned around and said, 'what can i do? the handle is in your hands, teacher.' chiu said, 'if you want, i'll tum it over to you.' the monk came up to chiu, grabbed the staff out of his hands, and hit him three times. chiu said, 'an unjust beating, an unjust beating! ' the monk said, 'there's someone receiving it.' chiu said, 'i hit this fellow carelessly.' immediately the monk bowed. chiu said, 'yet you act this way.' the monk laughed loudly and went out. chiu said, 'that's all it comes to, that's all it comes to.' </li><li><strong> tan hsia's have you eaten yet? </strong> tan hsia asked a monk, 'where have you come from? ' the monk said, 'from down the mountain.' hsia said, 'have you eaten yet or not? ' the monk said, 'i have eaten.' hsia said, 'did the person who brought you the food to eat have eyes or not? ' the monk was speechless. ch'ang ch'ing asked pao fu, 'to give someone food to eat is ample requital of the debt of kindness: why wouldn't he have eyes? ' fu said, 'giver and receiver are both blind.' ch'ang ch'ing said, 'if they exhausted their activity, would they still turn out blind? ' fu said, 'can you say that i'm blind?' </li><li><strong> yun men's cake </strong> a monk asked yun men, 'what is talk that goes beyond buddhas and patriarchs? ' men said, 'cake.' </li><li><strong> sixteen bodhisattvas go in to bathe </strong> in olden times there were sixteen bodhisattvas. when it was time for monks to wash, the bodhisattvas filed in to bathe. suddenly they awakened to the basis of water. all of you ch'an worthies, how will you understand their saying, 'subtle feeling reveals illumination, and we have achieved the station of sons of buddha'? to realize this you too must be extremely piercing and penetrating. </li><li><strong> t'ou tzu's all sounds </strong> a monk asked t'ou tzu, 'all sounds are the sounds of buddha-right or wrong? ' t'ou tzu said, 'right.' the monk said, 'teacher, doesn't your asshole make farting sounds? ' t'ou tzu then hit him. again the monk asked, 'coarse words or subtle talk, all returns to the primary meaning-right or wrong? ' t'ou tzu said, 'right.' the monk said, 'can i call you an ass, teacher? ' t'ou tzu then hit him. </li><li><strong> chao chou's newborn baby </strong> a monk asked chao chou, 'does a newborn baby also have the sixth consciousness? ' chao chou said, '(like) tossing a ball on swift-flowing water.' the monk also asked t'ou tzu, 'what is the meaning of 'tossing a ball on swift-flowing water'? ' t'ou tzu said, 'moment to moment, nonstop flow.' </li><li><strong> yao shan's shooting the elk of elks </strong> a monk asked yao shan, 'on a level field, in the shallow grass, the elk and deer form a herd: how can one shoot the elk of elks?  shan said, 'look-an arrow!  the monk let himself fall down. shan said, 'attendant, drag this dead fellow out. the monk then ran out. shan said, 'this fellow playing with a mud ball-what end will there be to it? ' hsueh tau commented saying, 'though he lived for three steps, after five steps he had to die.' </li><li><strong> ta lung's hard and fast body of reality </strong> a monk asked ta lung, 'the physical body rots away: what is the hard and fast body of reality? ' lung said, 'the mountain flowers bloom like brocade, the valley streams are brimming blue as indigo.' </li><li><strong> yun men's ancient buddhas and the pillar </strong> yun men, teaching the community, said, 'the ancient buddhas and the pillar merge-what level of mental activity is this?' he himself said on their behalf, 'on south mountain clouds gather, on north mountain rain falls.' </li><li><strong> vimalakirti's gate of nonduality </strong> vimalakirti asked manjusri,  'what is a bodhisattva's entry into the dharma gate of nonduality? ' manjusri said, 'according to what i think, in all things, no words, no speech, no demonstration and no recognition, to leave behind all questions and answers;  this is entering the dharma gate of nonduality.' then manjusri asked vimalakirti, 'we have each already spoken. now you should tell us, good man, what is a bodhisattva's entry into the dharma gate of nonduality? ' hsueh tau said, 'what did vimalakirti say?' he also said, 'completely exposed.' </li><li><strong> the hermit of t'ung feng makes a tiger's roar </strong> a monk came to the place of the hermit of t'ung feng and asked, 'if you suddenly encountered a tiger here, what then?' the hermit made a tiger's roar. the monk then made a gesture of fright.the hermit laughed aloud. the monk said, 'you old thief! 'the hermit said, 'what can you do about me? ' the monk gave up. hsueh tou said, 'this is all right, but these two wicked thieves only knew how to cover their ears to steal the bel.'  </li><li><strong> yun men's kitchen pantry and main gate </strong> yun men imparted some words saying, 'everyone has a light;  when you look at it, you don't see it and it's dark and dim. what is everybody's light? ' he himself answered on their behalf, 'the kitchen pantry and the main gate.' he also said, 'a good thing isn't as good as nothing.' </li><li><strong> medicine and disease subdue each other </strong> yun men, teaching his community, said, 'medicine and disease subdue each other:  the whole earth is medicine; what is your self? ' </li><li><strong> hsuan sha's guiding and aiding living beings </strong> hsuan sha, teaching the community, said, 'the old adepts everywhere all speak of guiding and aiding living beings. supposing they encountered three kinds of sick person, how would they guide them? with a blind person, they could pick up the gavel or raise the whisk, but he wouldn't see. with a deaf person, he wouldn't hear the point of words. with a mute person, if they had him speak, he wouldn't be able to speak. but how would they guide such people? if they couldn't guide these people, then the buddha dharma has no effect.' a monk asked yun men for instruction on this. yun men said, 'bow.' the monk bowed and rose. yun men poked at him with his staff; the monk drew back. yun men said, 'you're not blind.' then yun men called him closer; when the monk approached, men said, 'you're not dea£.' next yun men said, 'do you understand? ' the monk said, 'i don't understand.' yun men said, 'you're not mute.' at this the monk had an insight. </li><li><strong> the hands and eyes of the bodhisattva of great compassion </strong> yun yen asked tao wu, 'what does the bodhisattva of great compassion use so many hands and eyes for? ' wu said, 'it's like someone reaching back groping for a pillow in the middle of the night.' yen said, 'i understand.' wu said, 'how do you understand it? ' yen said, 'all over the body are hands and eyes.'' wu said, 'you have said quite a bit there, but you've only said eighty percent of it.' yen said, 'what do you say, elder brother? ' wu said, 'throughout the body are hands and eyes.' </li><li><strong> chih men's body of wisdom </strong> a monk asked chih men, 'what is the body of wisdom? ' chih men said, 'an oyster swallowing the bright moon.' the monk asked, 'what is the function of wisdom? ' chih men said, 'a rabbit getting pregnant.' </li><li><strong> yen kuan's rhinoceros </strong> one day yen kuan called to his attendant, 'bring me my rhinoceros-horn fan.' the attendant said, 'the fan is broken.' yen kuan said, 'if the fan is broken, bring the rhinoceros back to me.' the attendant had no reply. t'ou tzu said, 'i do not refuse to bring it out, but i fear the horn on its head will be imperfect.' hsueh tou commented, 'i want an imperfect horn.' shih shuang said, 'if i return it to the master, then i won't have it.' hsueh tou commented, 'the rhino is still there.' tzu fu drew a circle and wrote the word 'rhino' inside it. hsueh tou commented, 'why did you not bring it out before? '  pao fu said, 'the master is aged; he should ask someone else.' hsueh tou commented, 'what a pity to have worked hard without accomplishing anything.'  </li><li><strong> the world honored one ascends the seat </strong> one day the world honored one ascended his seat. manjusri struck the gavel and said, 'clearly behold the dharma of the king of dharma; the dharma of the king of dharma is thus.' the world honored one then got down off the seat. </li><li><strong> ta kuang does a dance </strong> a monk asked ta kuang, 'ch'ang ch'ing said, 'joyful praise on the occasion of a meal'-what was the essence of his meaning? a ta kuang did a dance. the monk bowed.j kuang said, 'what have you seen, that you bow? ' the monk did a dance. kuang said, 'you wild fox spirit! ' </li><li><strong> the surangama scripture's not seeing </strong> the surangama scripture says, 'when i do not see, why do you not see my not seeing?  if you see my not seeing, naturally that is not the characteristic of not seeing. if you don't see my not seeing/ it is naturally not a thing-how could it not be you? ' </li><li><strong> ch'ang ch'ing's three poisons </strong> ch'ang ch'ing once said, 'rather say that saints have the three poisons,! but do not say that the tathagata has two kinds of speech. i do not say the tathagata is speechless, just that he doesn't have two kinds of speech.' pao fu said, 'what is tathagata speech? ' ch'ing said, 'how could a deaf man hear? ' pao fu said, 'i knew you were talking on the secondary level.' ch'ing said, 'what is tathagata speech? ' pao fu said, 'go drink tea.' </li><li><strong> chao chou's three turning words </strong> chao chou expressed three turning words to his community. ('a gold buddha does not pass through a furnace; a wood buddha does not pass through fire; a mud buddha does not pass through water.') </li><li><strong> the diamond cutter scripture's scornful revilement </strong> the diamond cutter scripture says, 'if one is scornfully reviled by others, this person has done wicked acts in previous ages which should bring him down into evil ways,j but because of the scorn and vilification by others in the present age, the wicked action of former ages is thereby extinguished.' </li><li><strong> t'ien p'ing's travels on foot </strong> when the master of t'ien p'ing was travelling on foot, he called on hsi yuan. he always would say, 'do not say you understand the buddhist teaching; i cannot find a single man who can quote a saying. one day hsi yuan saw him from a distance and called him by name: 'ts'ung yi! ll p'ing raised his head: hsi yuan said, 'wrong! p'ing went two or three steps; hsi yuan again said, 'wrong!  p'ing approached;  hsi huan said, 'these two wrongs just now: were they my wrongs or your wrongs? '  p'ing said, 'my wrongs.' hsi yuan said, 'wrong! '  p'ing gave up.t hsi yuan said, 'stay here for the summer and wait for me to discuss these two wrongs with you.t but p'ing immediately went away. later, when he was dwelling in a temple, he said to his community,l 'when i was first travelling on foot, i was blown by the wind of events to elder ssu ming's place: twice in a row he said 'wrong!' and tried to keep me there over the summer to wait for him to deal with me. i did not say it was wrong then; when i set out for the south, i already knew that it was wrong.'  </li><li><strong> su tsung's ten-body controller </strong> emperor su tsung asked national teacher chung, 'what is the ten-body controller? ' the national teacher said, 'patron, walk on vairocana's head.' the emperor said, 'i don't understand.' the national teacher said, 'don't acknowledge your own pure body of reality.' </li><li><strong> paling's blown hair sword </strong> a monk asked pa ling, 'what is the blown hair sword? 'a pa ling said, 'each branch of coral supports the moon.'</li>

<h3>Book of Equanimity</h3>
<li><strong>The World-Honored One Ascends the Rostrum </strong> One day, the World-Honored One ascended to the rostrum. Manjusri struck the table with the gavel and said, 'Contemplate clearly the Dharma of the Dharma-King! The Dharma of the Dharma-King is like this.' Thereupon, the World-Honored One descended from the rostrum. </li><li><strong> Bodhidharma's 'Vast and Void' </strong> Emperor Bu of Ryô asked Great Master Bodhidharma, 'What is the highest meaning of the holy reality?' Bodhidharma replied, 'Vast and void, no holiness.' The emperor said, 'Who are you in front of me?' Bodhidharma said, 'I don't know.' The emperor did not match him. Finally, Bodhidharma crossed the Yangtze River and came to the Shôrin Temple. There he sat for nine years, facing the wall. </li><li><strong> The Indian King Invites the Patriarch </strong> A king of Eastern India invited the twenty-seventh patriarch, Prajna Tara, for a meal. The king asked, 'Why don't you recite sutras?' The patriarch said, 'The poor way does not stay in the world of subject when breathing in, and has nothing to do with the world of objects when breathing out. I am always reciting the suchness-sutra in millions and millions of volumes.' </li><li><strong> The World-Honored One Points to the Ground </strong> When the World-Honored One was walking with his assembly, he pointed to the ground with his hand and said, 'This place is good for building a temple.' Indra took a stalk of grass and stuck it in the ground and said, 'The temple has been built.' The World-Honored One smiled. </li><li><strong> Seigen's 'Price of Rice' </strong> A monk asked Seigen, 'What is the essence of Buddhism?' Seigen said, 'What is the price of rice in Roryô?' </li><li><strong> Master Ba's 'White and Black' </strong> A monk asked Great Master Ba, 'Apart from the four Phrases, beyond one hundred Negations, please tell me directly, Master, the meaning of Bodhidharma's coming from the West.' Master Ba said, 'I am tired today, I can't explain it to you. Go and ask Chizô.' The monk asked Chizô about it. Chizô said, 'Why don't you ask our master?' The monk said, 'He told me to ask you.' Chizô said, 'I have a headache today, I can't explain it to you. Go and ask Brother Kai.' The monk asked Brother Kai about it. Kai said, 'I understand nothing about that question.' The monk told Great Master Ba about it. Great Master said, ' Chizô's head is white, Kai's head is black.' </li><li><strong> Yakusan Ascends the Rostrum </strong> Yakusan had not ascended the rostrum for a long time. The temple steward said, 'All the assembly has been wishing for instruction for a long time. Please, Master, give your assembly a sermon.' Yakusan had the bell rung. The assembly gathered. Yakusan ascended the rostrum and sat there for a while. Then he descended and returned to his room. The temple steward followed him and asked, 'You said a while ago that you would give the assembly a sermon. Why didn't you speak even a word?' Yakusan said, 'For sutras, there are sutra specialists; for sastras, there are sastra specialists. Why do you have doubts about this old monk?' </li><li><strong> Hyakujô and the Fox </strong> Whenever Master Hyakujô delivered a sermon, an old man was always there listening with the monks. When they left, he left too. One day, however, he remained behind. Hyakujô asked him, 'What man are you, standing there?' The old man replied, ' In the past, in the time of Kashyapa Buddha, I lived on this mountain as a Zen priest. Once a monk came and asked me, 'Does a perfectly enlightened person fall under the law of cause and effect or not?' I said to him, 'He does not.' Because of this answer, I fell into the state of a fox for  lives. Now, I beg you, Master, please say a turning word.' Hyakujô said, 'The law of cause and effect cannot be obscured.' Upon hearing this, the old man became greatly enlightened. </li><li><strong> Nansen Kills a Cat </strong> Once the monks of the eastern and western Zen halls in Nansen's temple were quarrelling about a cat. As he saw this, Nansen held up the cat and said, 'You monks! If one of you can say a word, I will not slay the cat.' No one could answer. Nansen cut the cat in two. Nansen told Jôshû what had happened, and asked him for his view. Jôshû thereupon took his sandals, put them upon his head and went away. Nansen said, 'If you had been there, I could have spared the cat.' </li><li><strong> An Old Woman near Taizan </strong> There was an old woman on the way to Taizan. Whenever a monk asked her how to get to Taizan, she would answer, 'Go straight on.' After the monk had gone a few steps, she would say, 'This good and naïve fellow goes off that way, too.' Later a monk told Jôshû about this. Jôshû said, 'Wait a bit. I will go and see through her for you.' He went and asked the same question. The next day, Jôshû ascended the rostrum and said, 'I have seen through the old woman for you.' </li><li><strong> Unmon's 'Two Diseases' </strong> Great Master Unmon said, 'When the light does not penetrate, there are two diseases. Everything is unclear and things hang before you – this is one disease. Even after you have realized the emptiness of all things, somehow you feel as if there were still something there. This shows that the light has not yet penetrated thoroughly. 'Also there are two diseases concerning the Dharma-body. You have reached the Dharma-body, but you remain attached to the Dharma and cannot extinguish your own view; therefore you lead a corrupt life around the Dharma-body – this is one disease. Suppose you have truly penetrated to the end, if you give up further efforts, it will not do. You examine yourself minutely and say you have no flaw -- this is nothing but a disease.' </li><li><strong> Jizô Plants the Rice Field </strong> Jizô asked Shuzanshu, 'Where have you come from?' Shuzanshu said, 'I have come from the South.' Jizô said, 'How is Buddhism in the South these days?' Shuzanshu said, 'There is much lively discussion.' Jizô said, 'How could that match with our planting the rice field here and making rice-balls to eat?' Shuzanshu said, 'How could you then save the beings of the Three Worlds?' Jizô said, 'What do you call 'the Three Worlds'?' </li><li><strong> Rinzai's 'Blind Donkey' </strong> When Rinzai was about to die, he entrusted Sanshô with his Dharma and said, 'After my passing, do not destroy my treasury of the Eye of the true Dharma.' Sanshô said, 'How would I dare destroy your treasury of the Eye of the true Dharma?' Rinzai said, 'If someone asks you about it, how will you answer?' Sanshô instantly shouted his Kaatz. Rinzai said, 'Who knows that my treasury of the Eye of the true Dharma has been destroyed by this blind donkey?' </li><li><strong> Attendant Kaku Offers Tea </strong> Attendant Kaku asked Tokusan, 'Where have all the past saints gone?' Tokusan said, 'What? What?' Kaku said, ' I gave the command for an excellent horse like a flying dragon to spring forth, but there came out only a lame tortoise.' Tokusan was silent. The next day, when Tokusan came out of the bath, Kaku served him tea. Tokusan passed his hand gently over Kaku's back. Kaku said, 'This old fellow has gotten a glimpse for the first time.' Again, Tokusan was silent. </li><li><strong> Kyôzan Thrusts His Hoe into the Ground </strong> Isan asked Kyôzan, 'Where have you come from?' Kyôzan said, 'From the rice field.' Isan said, 'How many people are there in the rice field?' Kyôzan thrust his hoe into the ground and stood with his hands folded on his chest. Isan said, 'There are a great number of people cutting thatch on the South Mountain.' Kyôzan took up his hoe and left immediately. </li><li><strong> Mayoku Shook the Ring-Staff </strong> Mayoku, with his ring-staff in hand, came to Shôkei. He circled Shôkei's dais three times, shook the ring-staff and stood there bolt upright. Shôkei said, 'Right, right!' Mayoku then came to Nansen. He circled Nansen's dais three times, shook the ring-staff and stood there bolt upright. Nansen said, 'Not right, not right!' Then, Mayoku said, 'Master Shôkei said, 'Right, right!' Why, Master, do you say, 'Not right, not right!'?' Nansen said, 'With Shôkei it is right, but with you it is not right. This is nothing but a whirling of the wind. In the end, it will perish.' </li><li><strong> Hôgen's 'Hairsbreadth' </strong> Hôgen asked Shuzanshu, ''If there is only a hairsbreadth of difference, it is the distance between heaven and earth.' How do you understand that?' Shuzanshu said, 'If there is only a hairsbreadth of difference, it is the distance between heaven and earth.' Hôgen said, 'If that's your understanding, how could you ever attain IT?' Shuzanshu said, 'My view is just that. How about you, Master?' Hôgen said, 'If there only is a hairsbreadth of difference, it is the distance between heaven and earth.' Shuzanshu made a deep bow. </li><li><strong> Jôshû's Dog </strong> A monk asked Jôshû, 'Does the dog have buddha-nature, or not?' Jôshû said, 'It has' [U]. The monk said, 'If it has it, why did it creep into that skin bag?' Jôshû said, 'Because it does so knowingly.' Another monk asked, 'Does the dog have buddha-nature, or not?' Jôshû said, 'It has not' [Mu]. The monk said, 'All living beings have buddha-nature. Why doesn't the dog have any?' Jôshû said, 'Because it is in its karma-consciousness.' </li><li><strong> Unmon's 'Mt. Sumeru' </strong> A monk asked Unmon. 'Not a single thought arises: is there any fault or not?' Unmon said, 'Mt. Sumeru.' </li><li><strong> Jizô's 'Most Intimate' </strong> Jizô asked Hôgen, 'Where are you going, senior monk?' Hôgen said, 'I am on pilgrimage, following the wind.' Jizô said, 'What are you on pilgrimage for?' Hôgen said, 'I don't know.' Jizô said, 'Non knowing is most intimate.' Hôgen suddenly attained great enlightenment. </li><li><strong> Ungan Sweeps the Ground </strong> When Ungan was sweeping the ground, Dôgo said, 'You are having a hard time!' Ungan said, 'You should know there is one who doesn't have a hard time.' Dôgo said, 'If that's true, you mean there is a second moon?' Ungan held up his broom and said, 'What number of moon is this?' Dôgo was silent. Gensha said, 'That is precisely the second moon.' Unmon said, 'The servant greets the maid politely.' </li><li><strong> Gantô's Bow to the Kaatz </strong> Gantô came to Tokusan. He straddled the threshold of the gate and asked, 'Is this ordinary or is this holy?' Tokusan shouted, 'Kaatz!' Gantô made a deep bow. Hearing of this, Tôzan said, 'Hardly anyone but Gantô could have accepted it that way.' Gantô said, 'Old Tôzan can't tell between good and bad. At that time, I raised up with one hand and suppressed with the other.' </li><li><strong> Roso Faces the Wall </strong> Whenever Roso saw a monk coming, he immediately sat facing the wall. Hearing of this, Nansen said, 'I usually tell my people to realize what has existed before the kalpa of emptiness, or to understand what has been before Buddhas appeared in the world. Still, I haven't acknowledged one disciple or even a half. If he continues that way, he will go on even until the year of the donkey.' </li><li><strong> Seppô's 'Look at the Snake'</strong> Seppô, instructing the assembly, said, 'There's a poisonous snake on the southern side of the mountain. All of you should look at it carefully!' Chôkei said, 'Today in the Zen hall there are many people. They have lost their body and life.' A monk told this to Gensha, who said, 'Only Elder Brother Ryô [Chôkei] could say something like that. However, I wouldn't talk like that.' The monk asked, 'What then would you say, Master'? Gensha replied, 'Why does it have to be 'the southern side of the mountain'?' Unmon threw his staff in front of Seppô and acted frightened. </li><li><strong> Enkan's 'Rhinoceros Fan' </strong> One day, Enkan called to his attendant, 'Bring me the rhinoceros fan.' The attendant said, 'It is broken.' Enkan said, 'If the fan is already broken, bring me the rhinoceros himself.' The attendant gave no answer. Shifuku drew a circle and wrote the ideograph 'ox' in it. </li><li><strong> Kyôzan Points to Snow </strong> Kyôzan pointed to the snow lion and said, 'Is there any that goes beyond this color?' Unmon said, 'I would have pushed it over for him at once.' Setchô said, 'He only knows how to push it over, but he doesn't know how to help it up.' </li><li><strong> Hôgen Points to the Bamboo Blinds </strong> Hôgen pointed to the bamboo blinds with his hand. At that moment, two monks who were there went over to the blinds together and rolled them up. Hôgen said, 'One has gained, one has lost.' </li><li><strong> Gokoku's 'Three Disgraces' </strong> A monk asked Gokoku, 'How about when a crane perches on a withered pine tree?' Gokoku said, 'It is a disgrace when seen from the ground.' The monk asked, 'What about when every drop of water is frozen at once?' Gokoku said, 'It's a disgrace after the sun has risen.' The monk asked, 'At the time of the Eshô Persecution, where did the good Guardian Deities of the Dharma go?' Gokoku said, 'It is a disgrace for the two of them on both sides of the temple gate.' </li><li><strong> Fuketsu's 'Iron Ox' </strong> When he was staying at the government office of the Province Ei, Fuketsu entered the hall [to preach] and said, 'The heart seal [stamp] of the patriarch resembles the activity of the iron ox. When it goes away, the [impression of the] seal remains; when it stays there, the [impression of the] seal is brought to naught. If it neither goes away nor stays, would it be right to give a seal [of approval] or not?' Then Elder Rohi came up and said, 'I have the activities of the iron ox. [However,] I ask you, Master, not to give me the seal.' Fuketsu said, 'I am accustomed to leveling the great ocean through fishing whales. But, alas, now I find instead a frog wriggling about in the mud.' Rohi stood there considering. Fuketsu shouted 'Kaatz!' and said, 'Why don't you say anything else, Elder?' Rohi was perplexed. Fuketsu hit him with his whisk and said, 'Do you remember what you said? Say something, I'll check it for you.' Rohi tried to say something. Fuketsu hit him again with his whisk. The Magistrate said, 'Buddha's law and the King's law are of the same nature.' Fuketsu said, 'What principle do you see in them?' The Magistrate said, 'If you do not make a decision where a decision should be made, you are inviting disorder.' Fuketsu descended from the rostrum. </li><li><strong> Daizui's 'Kalpa Fire' </strong> A monk asked Daizui, 'When the great kalpa fire bursts out, the whole universe will be destroyed. I wonder if IT will also be destroyed or not.' Daizui said, 'Destroyed.' The monk said, 'If so, will IT be gone with the other?' Daizui said, 'Gone with the other.' A monk asked Ryûsai, 'When the great kalpa fire bursts out, the whole universe will be destroyed. I wonder if IT will also be destroyed or not.' Ryûsai said, 'Not destroyed.' The monk said, 'Why is it not destroyed?' Ryûsai said, 'Because it is the same as the whole universe.' </li><li><strong> Unmon's 'Pillar' </strong> Unmon, instructing the assembly, said, 'The old buddha and a pillar intersect each other. What number of activity is that?' The assembly was silent. He said on their behalf, 'Clouds gather over the South Mountain; rain falls on the North Mountain.' </li><li><strong> Kyôzan's Mind and Objective World </strong> Kyôzan asked a monk, 'Where do you come from?' The monk said, 'I am from Yû Province' Kyôzan said, 'Do you think of that place?' The monk said, 'I always do.' Kyôzan said, 'That which thinks is the mind. That which is thought about is the objective world. Within that are mountains, rivers and the great earth, towers, palaces, people, animals, and other things. Reflect upon the mind that thinks. Are there a lot of things there?' The monk said, 'I don't see anything at all there.' Kyôzan said, 'That's right for the stage of understanding, but not yet for the stage of personalization.' The monk said, 'Do you have any special advice, Master?' Kyôzan said, 'It is not right to say that there is or there is not. Your insight shows that you have obtained only one side of the mystery. Sitting down, putting on clothes – from now on you see by yourself.' </li><li><strong> Sanshô's 'Golden Scales' </strong> Sanshô asked Seppô, 'When a fish with golden scales has passed through the net, what should it get for food?' Seppô said, 'I will tell you when you have passed through the net.' Sanshô said, 'A great Zen master with  disciples doesn't know how to speak.' Seppô said, 'The old monk is just too busy with temple affairs.' </li><li><strong> Fuketsu's 'Speck of Dust' </strong> Fuketsu, giving instruction, said, 'If one raises a speck of dust, the house and the nation prosper. If one does not raise a speck of dust, they perish.' Setchô held up his staff and said, 'Is there anyone who lives and dies with this?' </li><li><strong> Rakuho's Obeisance </strong> Rakuho came to Kassan and without bowing stood facing him. Kassan said, 'A chicken dwells in the phoenix nest. It's not of the same class. Go away.' Rakuho said, 'I have come from far away, hearing much about you. Please, Master, I beg you to guide me.' Kassan said, 'Before my eyes there is no you, and here there is no old monk.' Rakuho shouted, 'Kaatz!' Kassan said, 'Stop it, stop it. Don't be so careless and hasty. Clouds and the moon are the same; valleys and mountains are different from each other. It is not difficult to cut off the tongues of the people under heaven. But how can you make a tongueless person speak?' Rakuho said nothing. Kassan hit him. With this, Rakuho started to obey Kassan. </li><li><strong> Master Ba Is Ill </strong> Great Master Ba was seriously ill. The temple steward asked him, 'Master, how are you feeling these days?' Great Master said, 'Sun-faced Buddha, Moon-faced Buddha.' </li><li><strong> Isan's 'Karma-Consciousness' </strong> Isan asked Kyôzan, 'Suppose a man asks you, saying, 'All living beings are tossed in a vast karma-consciousness, and have no foundation to rely upon.' How would you check him?' Kyôzan said, 'If such a monk appears, I call out to him, 'Mr. So-and-so!' When he turns his head, instantly I say, 'What is this?' If he hesitates, then I say to him, 'Not only is there a vast karma-consciousness, but also there is no foundation to rely upon.'' Isan said, 'Good.' </li><li><strong> Rinzai's 'True Person' </strong>  Rinzai instructed his assembly and said, 'There is one true person of no rank, always coming out and going in through the gates of your face. Beginners who have not yet witnessed that, look! look!' Then a monk came out and asked, 'What is the one true person of no rank?' Rinzai descended from the rostrum and grabbed him. The monk hesitated. Rinzai pushed him away and said, 'The true person of no rank -- what a shit-stick you are!' </li><li><strong> Jôshû's 'Wash Your Bowls' </strong> A monk asked Jôshû, 'I have just entered this monastery. I beg you, Master, please give me instructions.' Jôshû asked, 'Have you eaten your rice gruel yet?' The monk answered, 'Yes, I have.' Jôshû said, 'Then wash your bowls.' </li><li><strong> Unmon's 'White and Black' </strong> Unmon asked Kempô, 'May I ask for your answer?' Kempô said, 'Have you ever reached this old monk or not?' Unmon said, 'If so, I must say I was too late.' Kempô said, 'Is that so? Is that so?' Unmon said, 'I thought I was Marquis White, but I find that here is Marquise Black.' </li><li><strong> Rakuho at His Deathbed </strong> When he was about to die, Rakuho addressed his assembly and said, 'I have one matter to ask you about. If you say 'yes' to this, you are putting another head on your own. If you say 'no,' you are looking for life by cutting off your head.' The head monk said, 'The green mountain always lifts up its legs; you don't need to carry a lantern in the daylight.' Rakuho said, 'What time is this to utter such a saying?' A senior monk named Genjô stepped forward and said, 'Apart from these two ways, I beg you, Master, not to ask.' Rakuho said, 'That's not enough. Say some more.' Genjô said, 'I cannot say it fully.' Rakuho said, 'I don't care whether or not you can say it fully.' Genjô said, 'I feel just like an attendant who has nothing to respond to his master.' That evening, Rakuho called Genjô to him and said, 'Your response today had something quite reasonable. You have to realize what our late master said, 'There are no dharmas before the eyes, Yet consciousness is before the eyes. IT is not the Dharma before the eyes, IT cannot be reached by eyes and ears.' Which phrase is the guest? Which phrase is the host? If you can sort them out, I will transmit the bowl and robe to you.' Genjô said, 'I don't understand.' Rakuho said, 'You must understand.' Genjô said, 'I really don't understand.' Rakuho uttered a kaatz and said, 'Miserable, miserable!' [Another] monk asked, 'What would you like to say, Master?' Rakuho said, 'The boat of compassion is not rowed over pure waves. It's been wasted labor releasing wooden geese down the precipitous strait.' </li><li><strong> Nanyô and the Water Jug </strong> A monk asked National Teacher Chû of Nanyô, 'What is the essential body of Vairocana Buddha?' National Teacher said, 'Pass me that water jug.' The monk passed him the water jug. National Teacher said, 'Put it back where it was.' The monk asked again, 'What is the essential body of Vairocana Buddha?' National Teacher said, 'The old Buddha is long gone.' </li><li><strong> Razan's 'Appearing and Disappearing' </strong> Razan asked Gantô, 'What if things appear and disappear without ceasing?' Gantô scolded him saying, 'Who appears and disappears?' </li><li><strong> Kôyô's 'Suparnin' </strong> A monk asked Master Hô of Kôyô, 'The great dragon has emerged from the ocean, calming heaven and earth. How will you treat him when he suddenly appears before you?' Master Hô said, 'Suparnin, the king of birds, absorbs the entire universe. Who can stick his head within him?' The monk said, 'But how about when he does appear?' Hô said, 'It is like a falcon catching a pigeon. If you don't realize it, you will learn the truth through the 'inspection before the balcony.'' The monk said, 'If so, then I'll fold my hands on my chest and retreat three steps.' Hô said, 'You black tortoise under the Sumeru altar. Don't wait to be struck on the forehead again and get hurt.' </li><li><strong> Four Phrases from the Engaku Sutra </strong> The Engaku Sutra says: 'At all times, you do not raise the delusive mind. When there are all kinds of illusory thoughts, you do not extinguish them. Dwelling in the delusory state of mind, you do not add understanding. Where there is no understanding, you do not distinguish the truth.' </li><li><strong> Tokusan's 'Study Accomplished' </strong> Great Master Tokusan Emmyô instructed his assembly and said, 'If you have exhausted to the end, you will realize right away that all buddhas in the three worlds have stuck their mouths to the wall. Yet there is still one person – he is giving a great laugh. If you can recognize that person, you have accomplished your study.' </li><li><strong> Jôshû's 'Oak Tree in the Garden' </strong> A monk asked Jôshû, 'What is the meaning of the patriarch's coming from the West?' Jôshû said, 'The oak tree there in the garden.' </li><li><strong> Vimalakirti's 'Not-Two' </strong> Vimalakirti asked Manjusri, 'What does it mean that the Bodhisattva enters the Dharma-gate of Not-Two?' Manjusri said, 'I see it like this: in all phenomena, there are neither words nor explanations, neither presentations nor knowledge; it is beyond all questions and answers. That is what I understand with 'to enter the Dharma-gate of Not-Two'.' Then Manjusri asked Vimalakirti, 'All of us have finished giving our explanations. Now you should give your explanation. What does it mean that the Bodhisattva enters the Dharma-gate of Not-Two?' Vimalakirti remained silent. </li><li><strong> Tôzan and the Memorial Service </strong> When Tôzan held a memorial service for Ungan before his portrait, he mentioned the episode with the portrait. A monk came forward and asked, 'When Ungan said, 'Just this!' what did that mean?' Tôzan said, 'At that time, I almost misunderstood my master's meaning.' The monk said, 'I wonder whether or not Ungan really knew that IT is.' Tôzan said, 'If he did not know that it is, how could he say like that? If he knew that it is, how did he dare say like that?' </li><li><strong> Seppô's 'What Is This?' </strong> When Seppô was living in a hermitage, two monks came to pay their respects. When he saw them coming, Seppô thrust open the gate of his hermitage with his hands, jumped out, and said, 'What is this?' The monks also said, 'What is this?' Seppô hung his head and retired into his hermitage. Later, the monks came to Gantô. He asked them, 'Where have you come from?' The monks said, 'From Reinan.' Gantô said, 'Did you ever visit Seppô?' The monks said, 'Yes, we visited him.' Gantô said, 'What did he say?' The monks related what had happened. Gantô said, 'What else did he say?' The monks said, 'Not a word; he hung his head and retired into his hermitage.' Gantô said, 'Oh, how I regret now that in those days I did not tell him the last word! If I had told it to him, no one under heaven could do anything against him.' At the end of the summer practice period the monks came back to this conversation and asked him about its meaning. Gantô said, 'Why didn't you ask me about it sooner?' The monks said, 'We could not dare to ask you about it.' Gantô said, 'Seppô was born on the same stem as I, but he will not die on the same stem. If you want to know the last word, it is just this.' </li><li><strong> Hôgen's 'Boat or Land' </strong> Hôgen asked Senior Monk Kaku, 'Did you come by boat or by land?' Kaku said, 'By boat.' Hôgen said, 'Where is the boat?' Kaku said, 'The boat is on the river.' After Kaku had withdrawn, Hôgen asked a monk nearby, 'You tell me, did that monk who was here just now have the eye or not?' </li><li><strong> Sôzan's 'Dharma-body' </strong> Sôzan asked Elder Toku, ''The true Dharma-body of Buddha is like the empty sky. It manifests its form corresponding to things -- just like the moon on the water.' How do you explain the principle of this corresponding?' Toku said, 'It is like a donkey looking into a well.' Sôzan said, 'You put it in a nice way, but you were able to say only eighty percent.' Toku said, 'How about you, Master?' Sôzan said, 'It is like a well looking at a donkey.' </li><li><strong> Ôbaku's 'Drinkers' </strong> Ôbaku instructed the assembly and said, 'You are all drinkers of lees. If you continue to go on your Way like this, where will the 'Today' be? Do you know that in this great empire of Tang there is no Zen master?' Now a monk came forward and said, 'What would you say to the fact that in various places there are people who accept students and direct their assemblies?' Ôbaku said, 'I don't say that there is no Zen; I only say that there is no master.' </li><li><strong> Ungan's 'Great Mercy' </strong> Ungan asked Dôgo, 'What does the Bodhisattva of the Great Mercy use so many hands and eyes for?' Dôgo answered, 'It is like a person in the middle of the night reaching with his hand behind his head groping for his pillow.' Ungan said, 'I understood.' Dôgo said, 'How did you understand it?' Ungan said, 'The whole body is hands and eyes.' Dôgo said, 'You said it very well. But you expressed only eight-tenths of it.' Ungan said, 'How would you say it, Elder Brother?' Dôgo said, 'The entire body is hands and eyes.' </li><li><strong> Seppô in Charge of Cooking </strong> Seppô came to Tokusan and became in charge of cooking food. One day, the lunch was late. Tokusan came down to the hall carrying his bowls. Seppô said, 'Old Master, the bell has not yet rung nor the drum sounded. Where are you going with your bowls?' Thereupon Tokusan went back to his room. Seppô told this to Gantô. Gantô said, 'Great Tokusan though he is, he has not yet realized the last word.' Hearing of this, Tokusan sent his attendant to summon Gantô and then asked him, 'Don't you approve of this old monk?' Gantô whispered his intention. Tokusan remained silent. Sure enough, the next day, when Tokusan ascended the rostrum, his talk was quite different from usual. Gantô, rubbing his hands together, laughed and said, 'Wonderful! How happy I am that our Old Man has realized the last word. From now on he'll be subject to no one on earth.' </li><li><strong> Misshi and the White Rabbit </strong> When Uncle Misshi and Tôzan were walking together, they saw a white rabbit run by in front of them. Misshi said, 'How swift!' Tôzan said, 'In what way?' Misshi said, 'It is just like a person in white clothes being venerated as a prime minister.' Tôzan said, 'You are such an elderly and respectable man, and still you say something like that?' Misshi said, 'Then how about you?' Tôzan said, 'A noble of an ancient house is temporarily fallen into poverty.' </li><li><strong> Gon'yô's One 'Thing' </strong> Venerable Gon'yô asked Jôshû, 'How is it when a person does not have a single thing?' Jôshû said, 'Throw it away.' Gon'yô said, 'I say I don't have a single thing. What could I ever throw away?' Jôshû said, 'If so, carry it around with you.'  </li><li><strong> 'Getting Despised' in the Diamond Sutra </strong> The Diamond Sutra says, 'It is about getting despised by other people. If you are to come into hell because of your sins in your previous life, these sins will be extinguished because you are despised by the people of this world.' </li><li><strong> Seirin's 'Deadly Snake' </strong> A monk asked Seirin, 'How is it when a practitioner goes along a narrow path?' Seirin said, 'You will meet a deadly snake on the great road. I advise you not to run into it.' The monk said, 'What if I do run into it?' Seirin said, 'You will lose your life.' The monk said, 'What if I don't run into it?' Seirin said, 'You have no place to escape from it.' The monk said, 'Precisely at such a time, what then?' Seirin said, 'It is lost.' The monk said, 'I wonder where it is gone.' Seirin said, 'The grass is so deep, there is no place to look for it.' The monk said, 'You too, Master, must be watchful in order to get it.' Seirin clapped his hands and said, 'This fellow is equally poisonous.' </li><li><strong> Tetsuma, the Cow </strong> Ryû Tetsuma came to Isan. Isan said, 'Old Cow, you have come!' Tetsuma said, 'Tomorrow there will be a great feast at Mt. Tai. Will you go there, Master?' Isan lay down and stretched himself out. Tetsuma left immediately. </li><li><strong> Kempô's 'One Line' </strong> A monk asked Master Kempô in all earnestness, 'In a certain sutra it says, 'Ten-direction Bhagavats, one Way to the gate of nirvana.' I wonder where the Way is.' Kempô lifted up his stick, drew a line and said, 'Here it is.' The monk told Unmon about this and asked him. Unmon said, 'This fan jumps up to the heaven of the thirty-three devas and adheres to the nose of the deva Taishaku. When a carp in the eastern sea is struck with a stick, it rains torrents as though a tray of water is overturned.' </li><li><strong> Beiko's 'Enlightenment' </strong> Beiko had a monk ask Kyôzan, 'Do people these days really need enlightenment or not?' Kyôzan said, 'It is not that there is no enlightenment, but how can it be helped that it falls into the second class?' The monk went back to Beiko and told him about it. Beiko deeply agreed. </li><li><strong> Jôshû Asks about 'Death' </strong> Jôshû asked Tôsu, 'What if a man who has died a great Death comes back to life?' Tôsu said, 'I don't allow walking about in the night. Come in the daylight.' </li><li><strong> Shishô's 'Succession' </strong> Head Monk Shishô asked Hôgen, 'You have opened a zendo, Master. But who did you succeed to?' Hôgen said, 'Master Jizô.' Shishô said, 'You have gone a great deal against your late master Chôkei.'  Hôgen said, 'I still don't understand a turning word of Chôkei's.' Shishô said, 'Why didn't you ask me?' Hôgen said, ''The one body manifests itself in myriad phenomena' – what does it mean?' Shishô stuck up his whisk. Hôgen said, 'That is what you learned under Chôkei. What is your own view, Head Monk?' Shishô was silent. Hôgen said, 'When it is said, 'The one body manifests itself in myriad phenomena' – are the myriad phenomena swept away or are they not?' Shishô said, 'Not swept away.' Hôgen said, 'There are two.' All the disciples on the right and the left side said, 'Swept away.' Hôgen said, 'The one body manifests itself in myriad phenomena – Nii!' </li><li><strong> Shuzan's 'Bride' </strong> A monk asked Shuzan, 'What is Buddha?' Shuzan said, 'When a bride rides the donkey, her mother-in-law leads it by the bridle.' </li><li><strong> Kyûhô's 'Head and Tail' </strong> A monk asked Kyûhô, 'What is the head?' Kyûhô said, 'Opening the eyes and not perceiving the dawn.' The monk said, 'What is the tail?' Kyûhô said, 'Not sitting on a ten-thousand-year-old sitting place.' The monk said, 'What if there is a head, but no tail?' Kyûhô said, 'After all, it is not valuable.' The monk said, 'What if there is a tail, but no head?' Kyûhô said, 'Being complacent, yet having no power.' The monk said, 'What if the head matches the tail?' Kyûhô said, 'The descendants will prosper, but it is not known in the room.' </li><li><strong> The Wisdom in the Kegon Sutra </strong> The Kegon Sutra says, 'Now I see all living beings everywhere, and I see that each of them possesses the wisdom and virtue of Tathagata. But because of their delusions and attachments, they cannot realize it.' </li><li><strong> Kassan Brandishes the Sword </strong> A monk asked Kassan, 'What if one sweeps away the dust and sees Buddha?' Kassan said, 'You must brandish your sword. If you do not brandish your sword, the fisherman dwells in a nest of reeds.' The monk mentioned this to Sekisô and asked him, 'What if one sweeps away the dust and sees Buddha?' Sekisô said, 'He has no country. Where can one meet him?' The monk reported this to Kassan. Kassan ascended the rostrum and said, 'As for the facilities in the garden, the old monk is superior to Sekisô, but for deep discourse expounding the true principle he is one hundred steps ahead of me.' </li><li><strong> Nansen's 'Cats and Oxen' </strong> Nansen instructed the assembly and said, 'All the buddhas of the three worlds do not know that there is. Only the cats and Oxen know that there is.' </li><li><strong> Shinsan Asks about Nature </strong> Master Shinsan asked Master Shuzan, 'After you have clearly known the unborn nature of life, why are you still attached to life?' Shuzan said, 'The bamboo shoot necessarily becomes a bamboo. But is it possible to make a bamboo rope already out of a bamboo shoot?' Shinsan said, 'Later you will realize it yourself.' Shuzan said, 'My view is just as I said. What is your view?' Shinsan said, 'This is the temple steward's quarters, and that is the cooks' quarters.' Shuzan made a deep bow. </li><li><strong> Suigan's 'Eyebrows' </strong> Towards the end of summer, Suigan instructed the assembly, saying, 'All summer I've preached to you, my brothers. Look here, are Suigan's eyebrows still there?' Hofuku said, 'The robber's heart is terrified!' Chôkei said, 'They are well grown!' Unmon said, 'Barrier [Kan]!' </li><li><strong> Chûyû's 'Monkey' </strong> Kyôzan asked Chûyû, 'What does buddha-nature mean?' Chûyû said, 'I will explain it for you by allegory. Suppose there is a room with six windows. Inside there is a monkey. Outside, someone shouts, 'Monkey! monkey!' It immediately responds. If someone calls, 'Monkey!' through any of the windows, it responds just the same. It is just like that.' Kyôzan said, 'How about when the monkey is asleep?' Chûyû descended from his Zen seat, grasped Kyôzan and said, 'O monkey, monkey, there you are!' </li><li><strong> Sôzan's Filial Fulfillment </strong> A monk asked Sôzan, 'When one leaves off his mourning clothes, how about that?' Sôzan said, 'Sôzan today has fulfilled filial piety.' The monk said, 'How about after you have fulfilled piety?' Sôzan said, 'Sôzan loves to get drunk.' </li><li><strong> Hôgen's 'Form and Name' </strong> A monk asked Hôgen, 'I hear that a sutra says, 'From the basis of non-abiding all dharmas are established.' What is this basis of non-abiding?' Hôgen said, 'Form arises from what has no substance yet; name comes from what has no name yet.' </li><li><strong> Zuigan's 'Everlasting Principle' </strong> Zuigan asked Gantô, 'What is the intrinsic, everlasting principle?' Gantô said, 'It has moved.' Zuigan said, 'What if it moves?' Gantô said, 'You can't see the intrinsic, everlasting principle.' Zuigan thought for a moment. Gantô said, 'If you acknowledge it, you are not yet free from the roots and their dust. If you do not acknowledge it, you are immersed in endless birth and death. </li><li><strong> Shuzan's Three Verses </strong> Shuzan instructed his assembly and said, 'If you attain the first verse, you will be the teacher of buddhas and patriarchs. If you attain the second verse, you will be the teacher of heaven and humankind. If you attain the third verse, you cannot save even yourself.' A monk asked, 'Which verse did Your Reverence attain?' Shuzan said, 'The moon is set at midnight; I walk alone through the market place of the city.' </li><li><strong> Kyôzan: As His Profession Requires </strong> A monk asked Kyôzan, 'Your Reverence, do you know letters or not?' Kyôzan said, 'According to my capacity.' The monk immediately turned around once clockwise and said, 'What letter is this?' Kyôzan drew the ideograph for '' [ + ] in the earth. The monk turned himself around once counter-clockwise and said, 'What letter is that?' Kyôzan modified the sign' + ' into a swastika [卍]. The monk drew a circle in the air and lifted his two palms like Asura vigorously holding the sun and moon and said, 'What letter is that?' Kyôzan immediately drew a circle enclosing the swastika. The monk at once represented the vigor of a Rucika. Kyôzan said, 'Good, good. Keep it with care.' </li><li><strong> Unmon's 'Rice Cake' </strong> A monk asked Unmon, 'What is meant by the pronouncement 'to go beyond the Buddha and the patriarchs'?' Unmon said, 'Poor rice cake.' </li><li><strong> Chôsa Takes a Step </strong> Chôsa had a monk ask Master E, 'How was it when you had not yet seen Nansen?' E remained silent. The monk asked, 'What about after seeing him?' E said, 'Nothing special.' The monk returned and told Chôsa about this. Chôsa said, 'The man sits on the top of a hundred-foot pole. He has entered the way, but it is not yet genuine. He must take one step from the top of a hundred-foot pole. The worlds of the ten directions will be his complete body.' The monk said, 'How shall one take a step from the top of a hundred-foot pole?' Sa said, 'Mountains of Ro; water of Rei.' The monk said, 'I don't understand.' Sa said, 'Four seas and five lakes are all under the imperial reign.' </li><li><strong> Suibi and the Chin Rest </strong> Ryûge asked Suibi, 'What is the meaning of the Patriarch's coming from the west?' Suibi said, 'Bring me a chin rest.' Ryûge brought one and gave it to him. Suibi took it and hit him. Ryûge said, 'You may hit me as you like. After all there is no meaning to the Patriarch's coming from the west.' Ryûge also asked Rinzai, 'What is the meaning of the Patriarch's coming from the west?' Rinzai said, 'Bring me a sitting cushion.' Ryûge got one and gave it to Rinzai. Rinzai took it and hit him. Ryûge said, 'You may hit me as you like. After all there is no meaning to the Patriarch's coming from the west.' Later Ryûge became abbot of a temple. A monk asked him, 'Master, at that time, when you asked Suibi and Rinzai about the meaning of the Patriarch's coming from the west, did they  clarify it or not?' Ryûge said, 'They clarified it all right. After all, there is no meaning to the Patriarch's coming from the west.' </li><li><strong> Gensha Reaches the Province </strong> Gensha came to the Province Hoden. He was welcomed with great entertainment. The next day he asked the head priest, Shôtô, 'All the revelry of yesterday – where has it gone?' Shôtô held out the corner of his Buddhist garment. Gensha said, 'Far from it -- no connection at all.' </li><li><strong> Unmon's: 'Voice' and 'Color' </strong> Unmon instructed the assembly and said, ''To realize the way through hearing a voice, to enlighten the mind through seeing color' -- Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara comes with some small change and buys poor rice cakes. If he throws it away, he will get nice manjû cakes instead.' </li><li><strong> Dôgo's Nursing the Ill </strong> Isan asked Dôgo, 'Where have you come from?' Dôgo said, 'I come from nursing the ill.' Isan said, 'How many people are ill?' Dôgo said, 'There are some ill, and some not ill.' Isan said, 'The one who is not ill – isn't that you, dear Chi?' Dôgo said, 'Ill or not ill – it has nothing to do with 'that' matter. Say it quickly! Say it quickly!' Isan said, 'Even if I could say it, it would have no connection with that matter.' </li><li><strong> Gutei's One Finger </strong> Whatever he was asked, Master Gutei simply stuck up one finger. </li><li><strong> The National Teacher's Gravestone </strong> Emperor Shukusô asked Chû, the national teacher, 'What would you wish me to do after a hundred years?' The national teacher said, 'Make a seamless gravestone for this old monk.' The emperor said, 'I should like to ask you, master, for a design.' The national teacher remained silent for a long time. Then he said, 'Did you understand?' The emperor said, 'I didn't understand anything.' The national teacher said, 'I have a Dharma successor, my disciple Tangen, who is well versed with this matter.' Afterwards the emperor called Tangen and asked him about the meaning of this. Tangen responded: 'The south of the river, north of the lake: In between there's gold, which fills the whole land. Under the shadowless tree all people are in one boat; In the crystal palace there is no one who knows.' </li><li><strong> Rinzai's Great Enlightenment </strong> Rinzai asked Ôbaku, 'What is the great meaning of the Buddha-Dharma?' Ôbaku hit him. This happened three times. Rinzai then took his leave and went to see Daigu. Daigu asked, 'Where have you come from?' Rinzai said, 'From Ôbaku.' Daigu said, 'What did Ôbaku have to say?' Rinzai said, 'I asked him three times, 'What is the great meaning of the Buddha-Dharma?' and I got his stick three times. I don't know if I was in error or not.' Daigu said, 'Ôbaku was overly gentle like an old grandmother; he completely exhausted himself for your sake. Yet you come here and ask if you were in error or not!' With these words, Rinzai came to great enlightenment. </li><li><strong> Sozan: With or Without </strong> Sozan came to Isan and asked, 'I have heard that you said, 'Words of being and words of non-being are just like wisteria wound around a tree.' If suddenly the tree falls down and the wisteria withers, where will the words go?' Isan burst into great laughter. Sozan said, 'I sold my clothes and other belongings, and made an arduous journey of one thousand miles to come to you. Why does Your Reverence make light of me?' Isan called his attendant and said, 'Bring some money and give it to this reverend monk for his travel expenses.' Finally he said, 'Some day a one-eyed dragon will let you open your eyes.' Later Sozan went to Myôshô and told him about this. Myôshô said, 'I can say that Isan is completely right, but he did not meet one who could appreciate him.' Sozan asked again, 'If the tree falls down and the wisteria withers, where will the words go?' Myôshô said, 'It would make Isan laugh again all the more.' Upon hearing this, Sozan gained realization. Then he said, 'From the beginning, there was a sword behind Isan's laughter.' </li><li><strong> 'Non-Seeing' in the Ryôgon Sutra </strong> The Ryôgon Sutra says, 'When I don't see, why do you not see what I do not see? If you argue that you see what I do not see, that is of course not what I do not see. If you do not see what I do not see, then it is quite natural that it is not a thing. Why is it not your self?' </li><li><strong> Tôzan's 'Place of No Grass' </strong> Tôzan instructed the assembly and said, 'At the beginning of autumn and the end of summer, you, brothers, are departing east and west. But you should go directly to the place of no grass over ten thousand miles.' And again he said, 'How will you go to the place of no grass over ten thousand miles?' Sekisô said, 'When you go out of the gate, there is grass!' Taiyô said, 'I would say: Even if you don't go out of the gate, grass is abundant everywhere.'' </li><li><strong> Kyôzan Speaks Out </strong> Master Kyôzan went to Maitreya's abode in a dream and was led to the second seat. A venerable monk said, 'Today the second seat is due to speak.' Kyôzan stood up, struck the stand with the gavel, and said, 'The Dharma of Mahayana is beyond the four propositions and transcends the hundred negations. I dare speak this!' </li><li><strong> Nansen and the Peonies</strong> Minister Rikukô said to Nansen, 'Dharma-teacher Jô is wonderful. He truly knows what he is talking about: 'Heaven and earth and I have one and the same root; all things and I are one single body.'' Nansen pointed at the peonies in the garden and said, 'Minister, people of our time see these flowers as in a dream.' </li><li><strong> Unmon's 'One Treasure'</strong> Unmon said, ''Within heaven and earth, in the midst of the universe, there is one treasure hidden in a body.' You take up the lantern and go to the Buddha Hall; you take the temple gate and put it on the lantern.' </li><li><strong> Roso Does Not Understand </strong> Roso asked Nansen, ''People do not recognize the Mani-jewel. I picked it up myself in the Tathagata treasury.'  What is this treasury?' Nansen said, 'Old Master O  exchanges questions and answers with you. That's it.' Shiso said, 'How about when there is no exchange of questions and answers?' Nansen said, 'That's also the treasury.' Shiso said, 'What is the jewel?' Nansen said, 'Reverend Shiso!' Shiso said, 'Yes!' Nansen said, 'Get out. You don't understand my words.' </li><li><strong> Tôzan Unwell </strong> Tôzan was unwell. A monk asked, 'Your Reverence is unwell. Is there anyone who does not become ill?' Tôzan said, 'There is.' The monk said, 'Does the one who does not get ill take  care of Your Reverence?' Tôzan said, 'The old monk is properly taking care of that one.' The monk said, 'How about when your Reverence takes care of that one?' Tôzan said, 'Then the old monk does not see that there is illness.' </li><li><strong> Rinzai Draws a Line </strong> Rinzai asked the temple steward, 'Where have you come from?' The temple steward said, 'From selling brown rice in the province.' Rinzai said, 'Did you sell all of it?' The manager said, 'Yes, I sold all of it.' Rinzai drew a line with his staff and said, 'Have you sold all of this too?' The manager shouted, 'Kaatz!' Rinzai immediately struck him. Later, the cook monk came to Rinzai, who told him about this incident. The monk said, 'The steward didn't understand Your Reverence's intention.' Rinzai said, 'How about you?' The monk made a deep bow. Rinzai struck him likewise. </li><li><strong> Kyûhô Does Not Acknowledge </strong> Kyûhô served Sekisô as his attendant. After Sekisô's passing, the assembly wanted to make their head monk the abbot of the temple. Kyûhô would not acknowledge him. He said, 'Wait till I examine him. If he understands our late master's spirit and intention, I will serve him as I served our late master.' So he asked the head monk, 'Our late master said, 'Have been totally ceased; Have been totally extinguished; [Have become a cool land of desolation;]  Have had only one awareness for ten thousand years; Have become cold ashes and a withered tree; [Have become a fragrant censer in an ancient shrine;] Have become a vertical stripe of white silk.' Tell me, what sort of matter did he clarify with this?' The head monk said, 'He clarified the matter of absolute Oneness.' Ho said, 'If so, you have not yet understood our late master's spirit.' The head monk said, 'Don't you acknowledge me? Pass me incense.' He lit the incense and said, 'If I had not understood our late master's spirit, I would not be able to pass away while the smoke of this incense rises.' No sooner had he said this than he expired while sitting in zazen. Kyûhô caressed his back and said, 'Dying while sitting or standing is not impossible. But you could not even dream of our late master's spirit.' </li><li><strong> Emperor Dôkô's Helmet Hood </strong> Emperor Dôkô spoke to Kôke saying, 'I have attained the treasure of the Central Plain. However, no one can set a price on it.' Kôke said, 'Your Majesty, please lend it to me so that I may see.' The emperor pulled the straps of his helmet hood with both hands. Kôke said, 'Who can dare to set a price on the emperor's treasure!' </li><li><strong> Tôzan's 'Intimate with It' </strong> A monk asked Tôzan, 'Among the three bodies [of Buddha], what body does not degenerate into numbers?' Tôzan said, 'I am always most intimate with it.' </li><li><strong> Unmon's 'Bowl and Pail' </strong> A monk asked Unmon, 'What is the dust-dust samadhi?' Unmon said, 'Rice in the bowl, water in the pail.' </li><li><strong> Rôya's 'Mountains and Rivers' </strong> A monk asked Master Kaku of Rôya, 'The essential state is pure and clear. How are mountains, rivers and the great earth produced at once?' Kaku said, 'The essential state is pure and clear. How are mountains, rivers and the great earth produced at once?'</li>

<h3>The Gateless Gate</h3>
<li><strong>joshu's dog </strong> a monk asked joshu, 'has the dog the buddha nature?' joshu replied, 'mu (nothing)!' </li><li><strong> hyakujo's fox </strong> whenever hyakujo delivered a zen lecture, an old man was always there with the monks listening to it; and when they left the hall, so did he. one day, however, he remained behind, and hyakujo asked,'who are you?' the old man replied,'yes, i am not a human being, but in the far distant past, when the kashapa buddha (the sixth buddha of the seven ancient buddhas) preached in this world, i was the head monk in this mountain area. on one occasion a monk asked me whether an enlightened man could fall again under the law of karma (cause and effect), and i answered that he could not. thus i became a fox for 500 rebirths and am still a fox. i beg you to release me from this condition through your zen words.' then he asked hyakujo,'is an enlightened man subject to the law of karma?' hyakujo answered, 'no one is free from the law of karma.' at the words of hyakujo the old man was enlightened, and said with a bow, 'i am now released from rebirth as a fox and my body will be found on the other side of the mountain. may i request that you bury me as a dead monk?' the next day hyakujo had the karmadana, or deacon, beat the clapper and he informed the monks that after the midday meal there would be a funeral service for a dead monk. 'no one was sick or died,' wondered the monks. 'what does our roshi mean?' after they had eaten, hyakujo led them to the foot of a rock on the furthest side of the mountain, and with his staff poked the dead body of a fox and had it ritually cremated. in the evening hyakujo gave a talk to the monks and told them this story of the law of karma. upon hearing the story, obaku asked hyakujo, 'you said that because a long time ago an old zen master gave a wrong answer he became a fox for 500 rebirths. but suppose every time he answered he had not made a mistake, what would have happened then?' hyakujo replied, 'just come here to me, and i will tell you the answer!' obaku then went up to hyakujo--and slapped the teacher's face. hyakujo, clapping his hands and laughing, exclaimed, 'i thought the persian had a red beard, but here is another one with a red beard!' </li><li><strong> gutei's finger </strong> gutei raised his finger whenever he was asked a question about zen. a boy attendant began to imitate him in this way. when a visitor asked the boy what his master had preached about, the boy raised his finger. gutei heard about the boy's mischief, seized him and cut off his finger with a knife. as the boy screamed and ran out of the room, gutei called to him. when the boy turned his head to gutei, gutei raised up his own finger. in that instant the boy was enlightened. when gutei was about to die, he said to the assembled monks,'i received this one-finger zen from tenryu. i used it all my life and yet could not exhaust it' and then he passed away. </li><li><strong>  waku'an's 'why no beard?'  </strong> waku'an (looking at bodhidharma's picture) complained, 'why has that barbarian no beard?' </li><li><strong> kyogen's man hanging in the tree </strong> kyogen said, 'it (zen) is like a man (monk) hanging by his teeth in a tree over a precipice. his hands grasp no branch, his feet rest on no limb, and under the tree another man asks him, 'why did bodhidharma come to china from the west (india)?' if the man in the tree does not answer, he misses the question, and if he answers, he falls and loses his life. now what shall he do?'  </li><li><strong> the buddha's flower </strong> once upon a time when buddha was in grdhrakuta mountain, he twirled a flower in his finger and held it before his congregation. everyone was silent. only maha kashapa wholeheartedly smiled. buddha said, 'i have the eye of the true teaching, the heart of nirvana, the formless form, the mysterious gate of dharma. beyond the words and beyond all teachings to be transmitted, i now pass this on to maha kashapa.' </li><li><strong> joshu's washing the bowl </strong> a monk told joshu, 'i have just entered this monastery. i beg you to teach me.' joshu asked, 'have you eaten your rice porridge?' the monk replied, 'i have.' 'then,' said joshu, 'go and wash your bowl.' at that moment the monk was enlightened. </li><li><strong> keichu's wheel </strong> gettan asked a monk, 'if keichu (the ancient mythological wheel maker) made one hundred carts, and if we took off the wheels and removed the hub uniting the spokes, what would then become apparent? </li><li><strong> daitsu chisho buddha </strong> a monk asked seijo, 'daitsu chisho buddha did zazen (meditated) for ten kalpas in a meditation hall, could not realize the highest truth, and so could not become fully emancipated. why was this?' seijo said, 'your question is a very appropriate one!' the monk asked again, 'why did he not attain buddhahood by doing zazen in the meditation hall?' seijo replied, 'because he did not.' </li><li><strong> sozan and poor seizai </strong> a monk named seizai said to sozan, 'i am alone and poor. i beg my teacher to bestow upon me the alms of salvation.' sozan said, 'acarya seizai!' 'yes, sir?' replied seizai. sozan said, 'someone has drunk three bowls of the wine of haku of seigen, but says that he has not yet even moistened his lips.' </li><li><strong> joshu's hermit </strong> joshu went to a hermit's and asked, 'what's up? what's up?'(='have you any zen?') the hermit lifted up his fist. joshu said, 'the water is too shallow to anchor here,' and went away. joshu visited the hermit once again a few days later and said, 'what's up? what's up?' the hermit raised his fist again. then joshu said, 'well given, well taken, well killed, well saved.' and he bowed to the hermit. </li><li><strong> zuigan calls himself 'master'  </strong> every day zuigan used to call out to himself, 'master!' and then he answered himself, 'yes, sir!' and he added, 'awake, awake!' and then answered, 'yes, sir! yes, sir!' 'from now onwards, do not be deceived by others!' 'no, sir! i will not, sir!'  </li><li><strong>  tokusan's bowl </strong> one day tokusan came to the dining room from the meditation hall, holding his bowl. seppo saw him coming and asked, 'the dinner drum is not yet beaten. where are you going with your bowl? tokusan went back at once to his room. seppo told about this incident to ganto, who said, 'tokusan as he is, has not penetrated into the ultimate truth of zen.' tokusan heard of this and sent an acolyte to ask ganto to come to him. 'i have heard,' told tokusan, 'you are not approving my zen.' ganto whispered to tokusan what he meant. tokusan said nothing, leaving ganto there. next day, ascending the rostrum, tokusan delivered an entirely different sermon to the monks. ganto went forward in the hall, clapped his hands, laughed and said, 'what a happy thing! the old man has got hold of the ultimate truth of zen. from now on, no one in heaven and on earth can surpass him.' </li><li><strong> nansen cuts the cat in two </strong> nansen saw the monks of the eastern and western halls fighting over a baby cat. he seized the cat and said, 'if (any of) you can say (a word of zen), you can spare the cat. otherwise i will kill it.' no one could answer. so nansen cut the cat in two . that evening joshu returned and nansen told him what had happened. joshu thereupon took off his sandals and, placing them on his head, walked away. nansen said, 'if only you had been there, you could have saved the cat.' </li><li><strong> tozan's sixty blows </strong> tozan went to un-mon and un-mon asked him where he had come from. tozan answered, 'from sato!' then un-mon asked, 'where were you then during the summer?' tozan answered, 'at hoji temple in konan province.' un-mon further asked tozan, 'when did you leave there?' tozan replied, 'i left on august 25.' un-mon told tozan, 'you deserve 60 blows, but i will forgive you today!' the next day tozan knelt and deeply bowed to un-mon and said, 'yesterday you forgave me the 60 blows, but i still do not understand in what respect i was wrong.' then un mon told tozan, 'you are really a good-for-nothing rice eater! no wonder you wandered around konan and kosei for nothing!' at this very moment, tozan was awakened. </li><li><strong> un-mon's seven-fold robe </strong> un-mon said, 'the world is vast and wide; for what is it you put on your seven-piece robe at the sound of the bell?' </li><li><strong> echu's three calls </strong> echu, called kokushi, the teacher of the emperor, called his attendant, oshin, three times and three times oshin answered, 'yes!' kokushi said, 'i thought that i had offended you, but in reality you offended me!'  </li><li><strong> tozan's three pounds of flax </strong> a monk asked tozan, 'what is the buddha?' tozan answered, 'three pounds of flax!' </li><li><strong> nansen's ordinary mind </strong> joshu asked nansen, 'what is the way?' nansen answered, 'your ordinary mind--that is the way.' joshu said, 'can it be grasped (for study)?' nansen replied, 'the more you pursue, the more does it slip away.' joshu asked once more, 'how can you know it is the way?' nansen responded, 'the way does not belong to knowledge, nor does it belong to non knowledge. knowledge is illusion. non knowledge is beyond discrimination. when you get to this way without doubt, you are free like the vastness of space, an unfathomable void, so how can you explain it by yes or no?' upon hearing this, joshu was awakened. </li><li><strong> shogen's strong man </strong> shogen said,'why is it that a man of strength cannot lift up his own legs and stand up (for zen)?' and again, 'it is not with our tongue that we speak.' </li><li><strong> un-mon's dried dung </strong> a monk asked un-mon,'what is buddha?' un-mon answered him, 'dried dung.' </li><li><strong>  kashapa's flag pole </strong> ananda asked maha kashapa, 'buddha gave you the golden woven robe of successorship. what else did he give you?' kashapa said, 'ananda!' 'yes!' answered ananda. 'knock down the flagpole at the gate!' said kashapa.  </li><li><strong> eno's good and evil </strong> eno, the sixth patriarch, was pursued by monk emyo up to daiyurei. the patriarch, seeing emyo coming, laid the robe and the bowl on a rock, and said to him, 'this robe represents the faith. is it to be fought for by force? you may take them now.' emyo went to move the bowl and the robe and yet they were as heavy as mountains. he could not move them. hesitating and trembling, emyo asked the patriarch, 'i come for the teaching, not for the robe. please enlighten me!' the patriarch said, 'what is primordially emyo (i.e., your true self), if you do not think this is good nor do you think this is evil?' at that moment emyo was greatly awakened. his whole body was covered with sweat. emyo cried, bowed, and said, 'is there or is there not any other (deep) significance (in zen) than your secret words and teachings a minute ago?' the patriarch answered, 'what i have told you is no secret at all. once you have realized your own true self, the depth (in zen) rather belongs to you!' emyo said, 'when i was at obai with the other monks, i never realized what my true self was. now you have dispersed the clouds of my ignorance to realize it, just like a man capable of discerning warm and cold by tasting water. from now on you are my teacher!' the patriarch said, 'we both have obai for our teacher. guard your own self!' </li><li><strong> fuketsu's silence and words </strong> a monk asked fuketsu, 'without words or without silence transgressing, how can one be unmistakably one with the universe?' fuketsu said, 'i often think of march in konan (southern china). the birds sing among hundreds of flagrant flowers.' </li><li><strong> kyozan's sermon from the third seat </strong> in a dream kyozan went to maitreya's pure land and sat in the third seat. a monk there beat the gavel and said, 'today the one in the third seat will give a sermon.' kyozan arose, hit the gavel and said,'the truth of mahayana is beyond any verbal expression! listen, listen!' </li><li><strong> two monks roll up the blinds </strong> hogen of seiryo came to the hall to speak to the monks before the midday meal. he pointed with his finger to the bamboo blinds. at this moment two monks rose and rolled the blinds up. hogen observed, 'one has it, the other hasn't it.' </li><li><strong> nansen's no mind, no buddha </strong> a monk asked nansen, 'is there any teaching no master has ever preached before?' nansen replied, 'yes, there is.' 'what is it?' asked the monk. nansen answered, 'it is not mind, it is not buddha, it is not things.' </li><li><strong> ryutan's candle </strong> one night tokusan went to ryutan to ask for his teaching. after tokusan's many questions, ryutan said to tokusan at last, 'it is late. why don't you retire?' so tokusan bowed, lifted the screen and was ready to go out, observing, 'it is very dark outside.' ryutan lit a candle and offered it to tokusan. just as tokusan received it, ryutan blew it out. at that moment the mind of tokusan was opened. 'what have you realized?' asked ryutan to tokusan, who replied, 'from now on i will not doubt what you have said.' the next day ryutan ascended the rostrum and declared to the monks, 'among you there is one monk whose teeth are like the sword tree, his mouth is like the blood bowl. strike him with a stick, he won't turn his head to look at you. some day he will climb the highest peaks and carry out my teaching there.' on that day, in front of the lecture hall, tokusan burned to ashes his commentaries on the sutras and declared, 'in comparison to this awareness, all the most profound teachings are like a single hair in vast space. however deep the complicated knowledge of the world, compared to this enlightenment it is like one drop of water in the ocean.' then he left the monastery. </li><li><strong> eno's flag </strong>  the wind was flapping a temple flag, and two monks were arguing about the flag. one said, 'the flag is moving.' the other said, 'the wind is moving.' they could not agree, no matter how hard they debated. the sixth patriarch, eno, happened to come by and said, 'not the wind, not the flag. it is the mind that is moving!' the two monks were struck with awe. </li><li><strong> baso's very mind </strong> daibai asked baso, what is the buddha?' baso answered, 'the mind is the buddha.' </li><li><strong>  joshu investigates an old woman </strong> a (travelling) monk asked an old woman the way to taizan. the old woman said, 'go straight ahead.' when the monk proceeded a few steps, she said to herself, 'this monk with such spirit also goes off like that!' afterwards, another monk told joshu about this, and joshu said, 'wait until i go and investigate the old woman.' the next day off joshu went and asked the same question and the old woman gave the same answer. upon his return, joshu told the congregation of monks, 'i have investigated the old woman of taizan.' </li><li><strong> a 'pagan' asks buddha </strong> a 'pagan' asked buddha, 'with words, with silence, will you tell me (the way)?' buddha silently kept meditating. the 'pagan' bowed and thanked the buddha, saying, 'with the compassion you have cleared away the clouds of my mind and have made me enter into the awakening.' after he left, ananda asked the buddha what he had attained. the buddha said, 'a good horse runs even a shadow of the whip.' </li><li><strong> neither mind nor buddha </strong> a monk asked baso, 'what is the buddha?' baso replied, 'not mind, not buddha.'  </li><li><strong> nansen's no way </strong> nansen said, 'mind is not buddha. knowledge is not the way.' </li><li><strong> two souls </strong> goso asked a monk, 'sei, the chinese girl, who was separated from her soul. which was the real sei?' </li><li><strong> goso's no words, no silence </strong> goso said, 'when you meet a man of the way on the road, greet him not with words, nor with silence. tell me, how will you greet him?' </li><li><strong> joshu's oak tree in the garden </strong> a monk asked joshu, 'with what intention did bodhidharma come to china?' joshu answered, 'the oak tree in the front garden.' </li><li><strong> goso's buffalo </strong> goso asked, 'a water buffalo goes out of his 'enclosure.' the head, the horns, and the four legs go through, but why doesn't the tail, too?' </li><li><strong> un-mon and trap into words </strong> as soon as a monk stated un-mon, 'the radiance of the buddha quietly and restlessly illuminates the whole universe', un-mon asked him, 'are these you are reciting not the words of chosetzu shusai?' the monk replied, 'yes, they are.' un-mon said, 'you are trapped in words!' afterwards shishin brought up the matter once more and said, 'tell me, how was the monk trapped in words?' </li><li><strong> kicking the drinking water jar </strong> during his stay under master hyakujo, isan was a cooking monk. as master hyakujo wished to send a monk to found the new monastery called the great mount i, maser hyakujo told the chief monk and all other monks that he would choose the one who would demonstrate himself as the best among them. then master hyakujo brought out a drinking water jar, put it down and said, 'you cannot call it a water jar. then, what will you call it?' the chief monk said, 'one cannot call it a wooden stick.' then, when master hyakujo turned to isan, isan kicked the jar and walked away. master hyakujo laughed and said, 'the chief monk lost it to isan.' he made isan the founder of the great i-san monastery. </li><li><strong> bodhidharma's peace of mind </strong> boddhidharma sit facing the stone wall. the second patriarch, suika, stood long in the thick snow. finally, he severed his own arm and presented it to bodhidharma. he said, 'your student cannot pacify his mind. you, the first patriarch, please, give me peace of mind!' the first patriarch replied, 'bring that mind, i will calm it down!' the second patriarch said, 'i search for it everywhere, but i cannot find it!' boddhidharma replied, 'i have already pacified it for you!' </li><li><strong> a woman comes out of meditation </strong> when the wisest boddhisattva manjusuri, who is supposed to be next in order to shakyamuni buddha, found that the buddha' gathering was adjourned and each was going back to his/her land. observing one woman still deep in meditation near shakyamuni, manjusuri properly bowed and asked shakyamuni buddha, 'that woman has been able to reach that state of enlightenment and why have i not?' shakyamuni replied, 'bring her from the samadhi and ask her yourself!' manjusuri went round the woman three times and snapped his fingers and yet she was undisturbed in meditation. so manjusuri held her high up in his hand and brought her to the first of three meditative heavens (totally detached from any lust) and exhausted all his mystical powers in vain (to awaken her). observing this, shakyamuni said, 'even a hundred thousand manjusris could not awaken her from samadi. there resides momyo (avidya) boddhisattva, the lowest of all, below this place past twelve hundred million lands. he alone can raise her from her deep meditation.' no sooner had the shakyamuni spoken than that boddhisattva sprang up out of the earth, bowed and paid his homage to shakyamuni. by shakyamuni order, mo-myo boddhisattva snapped his fingers. instantly the woman came out of meditation and stood up. </li><li><strong> shuzan's bamboo spatula </strong> master shuzan held out his bamboo spatula and asked, 'if you call this a bamboo spatula, you give umbrage (to the principle of zen). if you call this no bamboo spatula, you violate the law (of common-sense). what will all of you call this?'  </li><li><strong> basho's staff </strong> master basho said to his disciples, 'if you have the staff, i will give it to you. if you have no staff, i will take it away from you!' </li><li><strong> who is he? </strong> to tozan, master hoen the fifth patriarch said, 'shakyamuni and maitreya boddhisattva, both are his slaves. well, tell me: who is he?' </li><li><strong> proceed beyond the top of the 100 foot high pole </strong> master sekiso said, 'you are at the top of the 100 foot high pole. how will you make a step further?' another zen master of ancient times said, 'one who sits on top of the 100 foot pole has not quite attained true enlightenment. make another step forward from the top of the pole and throw one's own body into the 100,000 universes.'  </li><li><strong> tosotsu's three barriers </strong> master tosotsu, setting up the three barriers, always tried the pursuer of the way: 'to search for the way, the zen student tries to grasp one's own nature and be enlightened.' 'now where is your true nature?' secondly, 'once having grasped one's own nature, one is free from birth and death. if then, one's eyeballs have dropped dead, how can one be free from life?' thirdly, 'being free from birth and death, one instantly knows where to go after death.' 'being dead and the body dispersed into the four elements, where then does one go?' </li><li><strong> the one road of kempo  </strong> a student monk asked master kempo, 'i understand that all buddha of the whole universe enter the one road into nirvana. where is this one road? kempo raised his walking stick, drew the figure 'one' and said, 'here it is.' later, this monk went to umon to ask the question. umon, turning around his fan, said, 'this fan will reach the thirty-third heaven and hit the nose of sakra devendra, the highest deity in these heavens. it is like the giant carp of the eastern sea tipping over with its tail a rain cloud to have the rain pour down.' </li>
